03 CV Response to Exercise
---

Hello everyone. And welcome to our module on the cardiovascular response to exercise.

In this video, I'm going to go through the cardiovascular response to exercise. And by that, I mean, I'm going to discuss the physiologic changes that occur in the vascular system when you exercise. This is a very important application of basic principles of cardiac physiology. It's also commonly tested in very high yield for the USMLE step one exam.

So when you exercise, the body's overall goal is to maximize the profusion to skeletal muscles in the heart, and to minimize the profusion to all other areas of the body. The initiator for this response is muscle hypoxia. When you begin exercising your tissue beds and your muscles become hypoxic, and that triggers the body's response and the mediator of that response is the sympathetic nervous system.

It is what drives all the different changes that occur in the cardiovascular system. The process of the body's response to exercise begins with muscle contraction. When you start exercising, you contract your muscles, and this leads to the consumption of ATP. When you consume ATP, you then consume oxygen because you need more ATP for your muscle tissue.

The result is local hypoxia in muscle tissue. And this leads to vasodilation, which is a very important intermediate step in the body's response to exercise. Vasodilation results because of multiple mediators that are released into the plasma in muscle tissue, which is hypoxic. This includes adenosine generated from ATP consumption, also lactate, carbon dioxide, and potassium among other mediators.

The net result of the vasodilation in muscle tissue is a lowering of total peripheral resistance, which is a very important physiologic change that occurs with exercise. The fallen peripheral resistance leads to activation of the sympathetic nervous system, which leads to many of the physiologic changes associated with exercise.

There's a rise in contractility and stroke volume. The heart rate goes up, but the net result of both of these changes, is arise in cardiac output. When the cardiac output goes up, you push more blood into the arterial system. This leads to a rise in the systolic blood pressure.

In addition, there's vasoconstriction to some areas that are not important during exercise. Areas like the gut and the skin. This helps to redistribute blood to the important areas like the heart and the muscle. The blood pressure changes that occur with exercise are very high yield.

So let's review those on this slide. The systolic blood pressure usually rises with exercise. This is because the cardiac output goes up that drives more blood into the arterial tree, and that raises the systolic blood pressure. Always remember that the primary determinant of the systolic blood pressure is the cardiac output.

When the cardiac output goes up, the SBP usually rises. And when the cardiac output falls, the systolic pressure usually falls. The diastolic blood pressure with exercise, decreases slightly or stays normal. Why does this happen? Well, as we discussed, there's local dilation of skeletal muscles. And remember that the primary determinant of the diastolic blood pressure, is the peripheral resistance so that dilation can lower the peripheral resistance and that can decrease the diastolic blood pressure.

So because you've got systolic pressure up and diastolic blood pressure is staying flat or going down, the net result is that you will have a widening of the pulse pressure, which is the difference between the two. So the pulse pressure goes up with exercise. And as we discussed previously, the total peripheral resistance goes down because of dilation of vessels in skeletal muscles.

There are important changes to coronary artery perfusion that occur as part of the response to exercise. This is because the faster heart rate shortens diastole. Recall the coronary arteries are perfused during diastole, not systole like most arteries in the body. This means that when the faster heart rate shortens diastole, there is less coronary filling time. As a result, the coronary arteries must vasodilate in order to increase their blood flow. This is the only way to get more oxygen to myocardial tissue. Myocardial tissue cannot extract more oxygen because it already extracts the maximum oxygen from red blood cells at baseline.

Other tissues in the body can take more oxygen from red cells when they need it, but the heart cannot do this because it is always extracting the maximum amount. Thus, the only way it can increase the oxygen delivery is by increasing the blood flow, and the only way it can do that, in the setting of a shorter diastole, is to increase the amount of coronary vasodilation.

Your preload rises with exercise. This is because sympathetic stimulation leads to venous contraction as we discussed previously. This will increase the preload and the end-diastolic volume. And this is another contributor to the rise in cardiac output seen with exercise along with the increased heart rate and the contractility.

The left ventricular ejection fraction increases dramatically with exercise. If you look at the two moving images in the bottom of the screen, the left side is a patient before exercise, the right side is after exercise. You can see that before exercise, the left ventricle thickens and the walls come in, but there's still plenty of black left in the middle. On the right side, the heart is contracting so vigorously after exercise, that almost all the black in the middle is eliminated. I show you these pictures because this is an easy way to remember that the left ventricular ejection fraction goes up with exercise.

The reason this happens is because there's more vigorous contraction in the setting of exercise and sympathetic stimulation. The major impact is decreasing the end-systolic volume as a result of increased contractility. There's minor changes on the end-diastolic volume. The reason is that there's more preload, which tends to raise the end-diastolic volume. However, there's less filling at fast heart rates. Thus, the change in the end-diastolic volume tends to be relatively minor and somewhat variable. However, the ejection fraction, if you look at the top right side of the screen, is dictated by the end-diastolic volume, minus the end-systolic volume over the end-diastolic volume. So if the end-systolic volume goes way down, it will make the EF go way up by this equation.

There's one additional concept in cardiac physiology that we haven't discussed yet, and it's particularly important in exercise. And that's the concept of lusitropy. Lusitropy is myocardial relaxation; it's the opposite of contractility. Contractility is how vigorously the walls of the left ventricle come together to push blood out of the ventricle into the order in systole. Lusitropy is how vigorously the walls of the left ventricle come apart in diastole. When they come apart, they suck in blood and raise the preload, which raises the cardiac output. Thus, when the degree of lusitropy increases, the left ventricle relaxes more vigorously. This pulls in more blood and raises a preload and raises contractility. And just like contractility, lusitropy is increased with exercise. This contributes to the increased preload seen with exercise, which leads to the rise in cardiac output.

The key regulatory protein of lusitropy in the heart is called phospholamban. This regulatory protein is an inhibitor of a very important enzyme called SERCA. SERCA stands for the sarcoplasmic reticulum, calcium ATPase. And this enzyme regulates lusitropy in ventricular myocytes.

To understand this, imagine we have the sarcoplasmic reticulum inside of ventricular myocyte. In order for relaxation to occur, the sarcoplasmic reticulum must pull calcium from the systole so that the myocyte can relax. SERCA facilitates uptake of calcium from the systole into the sarcoplasmic reticulum. And it is normally inhibited by phospholamban. However, beta adrenergic stimulation via the sympathetic nervous system can phosphorate phospholamban.

This makes it stop inhibiting SERCA and it allows SERCA to take up calcium more vigorously, out of myocytes in the left ventricle. This leads to more rapid and more vigorous relaxation and an increase in lusitropy. Here's a picture to make this more clear. Here SERCA in the membrane of the sarcoplasmic reticulum. It is normally inhibited by phospholamban, however, sympathetic stimulation phosphorylates phospholamban via beta adrenergic stimulation. This inactivates phospholamban, it relieves the inhibitory effect, it allows SERCA to take up more calcium and thus there is more vigorous relaxation to the left ventricle, that leads to a rise in lusitropy and an increase in preload.

I'll finish this video with this concept map, which summarizes all the changes that occur in exercise that you need to know for the step one exam. So when exercise begins, this leads to muscle hypoxia, which causes vasodilation. Vasodilation lowers the TPR, it lowers the afterload and that activates the sympathetic nervous system. In addition the lowering of afterload can decrease the diastolic blood pressure.

At this point, the sympathetic nervous system becomes the mediator for all the physiologic changes that occur with exercise . In the peripheral vessels, there will be constriction of arterials to unimportant areas like the skin and the gut. There will be venous constriction, which will send blood back to the left ventricle, raising the preload and raising the end-diastolic volume.

In the heart, the sympathetic activation will increase contractility and heart rate. The increased contractility will lower the end-systolic volume and raise the ejection fraction, as we saw in those echocardiogram images earlier. The higher heart rate, plus the increase in contractility, plus the increase in lusitropy, all contribute to a rise in cardiac output, and that raises the systolic blood pressure.

And that concludes our video on the cardiovascular response to exercise.