05 Regulation of Blood Pressure
---

Hello everyone and welcome to our module on regulation of blood pressure.

Blood Pressure is the driving force for blood flow and normal blood pressure is required for perfusion of tissues in the body. However, as you likely know, your blood pressure can change depending on environmental conditions for example, when you take in more or less sodium and water, this could raise or lower your blood pressure. 

Turns out, however, that the body has a sophisticated set of mechanisms to keep the blood pressure relatively constant. The nervous system can modify the vascular system so that blood pressure stays relatively constant despite being in different environmental settings for blood pressure might go up and down for other reasons. In order for your brain to be able to control blood pressure, it first must sense the blood pressure. And the way this is done in the body is through structures called baroreceptors. 

Baroreceptors are found in a number of places in the body and they can be stretched when blood pressure rises, and when they are stretched, they send more signals to the central nervous system in the brain, and therefore the brain knows what your blood pressure is. The brain can then respond via the autonomic nervous system the sympathetic and parasympathetic systems to modify blood pressure and keep it relatively constant over time. 

There are a number of ways that the autonomic nervous system modifies blood pressure, the autonomic nervous system can change the heart rate and the contractility of the left ventricle. The nervous system can modify arterial tone, the degree of vasoconstriction and vasodilation can raise or lower the blood pressure. The autonomic nervous system can also modify the venous tone so your veins hold lots of blood volume under normal circumstances. 

When those veins constrict, we say that the body has increased venous tone, and this pushes blood volume out of the veins and into the heart and raises the preload to the left ventricle. And then finally, baroreceptors are also found in the kidneys and the kidneys can release more renin when the blood pressure changes and they want to maintain a normal blood pressure. 

The major baroreceptors that I'll talk about in this video are those that are found in the aortic arch and the carotid sinus. These baroreceptors are important for quick responses to changes in blood pressure, they allow a rapid response to the body via the autonomic nervous system. There are also baroreceptors found in the kidneys, which can modify renin release. These are part of a slower response to changes in blood pressure via the renin angiotensin aldosterone system, which I talk about in detail in some of the kidney videos. 

If you look at this drawing I've shown in the screen here, this is the aortic arch and this is where the aortic arch baroreceptors are found, and they can send signals to the brain to modify the output of the autonomic nervous system. It turns out that the baroreceptors in the aortic arch are best at sensing elevated blood pressure when your blood pressure rises, that's when these baroreceptors are most effective. 

They have relatively poor sensing of low blood pressure basically, when your blood pressure falls below the normal range, these baroreceptors aren't able to modify their signaling very much and therefore they do a poor job of telling the brain when there's very low blood pressure. The other baroreceptors are found in the carotid sinus shown here on the drawing. 

These are the most important baroreceptors overall, these baroreceptors can modify their signals to the brain over a much wider range of blood pressure compared with the aortic arch. And they are useful, therefore, for sensing both low and high blood pressure and directing the autonomic nervous system to respond.

Shown in this slide is a schematic of how the body responds to changes in blood pressure. And I'll use this schematic to talk about a number of different physiologic situations. So your blood pressure is sensed by the aortic arch and the carotid sinus as we just described. Those signals from those baroreceptors are sent to the brain via efferent fibers.

Anytime you hear of an afferent nerve fiber, that is a fiber that is arriving at the brain with information. The carotid sinus sends its signals via cranial nerve nine, the glossopharyngeal nerve. The aortic arch sends its signals via cranial nerve vagus nerve. Once those signals arrive in the brain, the sympathetic and parasympathetic branches of the autonomic nervous system are modified to respond. Those systems respond via efferent fibers.

Anytime you hear of an efferent nerve fiber, that is a nerve fiber exiting the brain. You can just remember afferent for arrives and efferent for exits. The portion of the brain that senses the signals coming from baroreceptors in the carotid sinus and aortic arch is called the nucleus solitarius and it's found in the medulla.

It sends signals via those efferent fibers of the autonomic nervous system that direct the response to changes in blood pressure. These are responses like constriction or dilation of veins and arteries or changes in heart rate and contractility. So let's go through some physiologic changes and talk about how this system responds.

So first, let's imagine that your blood pressure goes up. Maybe you're very angry at someone and your blood pressure starts to get high, how will the body respond? Well, first of all that high blood pressure is sensed in the kidney, which can modify salt and water retention via the renin angiotensin aldosterone system.

That's a much slower response, and not a major part of the quick response to short term elevations and blood pressure. The faster responses come from the aortic arch and the carotid sinus which will both sense the high blood pressure and signal the brain via the vagus nerve and the colossal pharyngeal nerve.

The sympathetic and parasympathetic systems will then respond and what they will do is arteries will dilate, this will bring the blood pressure down, veins will dilate, this will pull more blood in the venous system and reduce the preload to the left ventricle and that will lower the blood pressure. And in the heart, these systems will lower the heart rate and decrease the contractility so the combined effect of all these changes is that your blood pressure will then be brought down once it is sensed by the systems.

Now let's talk about what happens when there is hemorrhage and loss of blood. This will lower the blood pressure and the system will respond to the drop in blood pressure. So how will this take place? First of all the kidneys will sense the fall in blood pressure and they will respond by modifying the renin aldosterone system to increase salt and water retention.

This is slow and takes longer time to occur, the quicker response occurs through the nervous system. So remember, the aortic arch is not great at sensing low blood pressure, so it won't be able to sense low blood pressure very well. But the carotid sinus is very good at sensing low blood pressure, and it will modify signals to the brain via the cranial nerve nine the glossopharyngeal nerve. This will lead to an alteration in the output of the autonomic nervous system so veins will constrict and they will push blood volume into the heart, arteries will constrict and this will raise the blood pressure. And in the heart, the sympathetic nervous system will raise heart rate and contractility and this will also try to combat the falling blood pressure that occurs in the setting of hemorrhage.

These systems can also be modified by carotid massage, so if you press on a patient's neck and massage the carotid sinus, you will trick the carotid sinus into thinking the blood pressure is high. Basically, you are manually stretching those baroreceptors the same way they would be stretched if the blood pressure was high. And in some cases, this happens to patients when they are shaving or buttoning a tight shirt and actually patients can faint because of the response to this system.

So let's go through that response now. So when you massage the carotid sinus, you trick the system into thinking that the blood pressure has been raised. This is sensed by the aortic arch and the carotid sinus and then the brain responds through the autonomic nervous system the same way it responds to high blood pressure, veins dilate, arteries dilate, and the heart rate in the contractility fall. So all these things can reduce the blood pressure and that's the reason that patients sometimes have syncope when they press on their carotid sinus.

One of the ways that physiologists initially determined how this system works was by performing studies on animals where they occluded the carotid artery. This would trick the carotid sinus into thinking the blood pressure was low. So let's talk about how one of these carotid occlusion studies would work. So if you occlude the carotid artery, you will trick the body into thinking blood pressure is low at the carotid sinus.

So the carotid sinus will sense the low blood pressure and send signals via the glossopharyngeal nerve to the brain, the output of the autonomic nervous system will be modified and what the body will do is constrict veins to send blood volume back to the heart, constrict arteries and also raise the heart rate and contractility. So the net effect of occluding a carotid artery is that the heart rate goes up, blood vessels constrict and the blood pressure rises.

You can also affect the system by severing cranial nerve nine, this can sometimes occur accidentally during surgery. So when you do this, the carotid sinus will stop sending signals to the brain and that will trick the brain into thinking that the blood pressure is low and the brain will respond the same way it always does to low blood pressure by constricting veins and arteries and raising the heart rate and contractility. So the result of severing the glossopharyngeal nerve is that the heart rate will go up, the blood vessels will vasoconstrict and the blood pressure will rise.

And just for completeness sake, let's talk about what would happen if you severed cranial nerve 10. If this happened, the aortic arch would not be able to transmit signals to the brain and this could lead the brain to think that there was low blood pressure. Remember what I said before, that the aortic arch baroreceptors do a relatively poor job of signaling the brain that there is low blood pressure. So this really wouldn't have much effect on this system overall in terms of tricking the brain into thinking there's low blood pressure. The main consequence of severing cranial nerve 10 is that you disrupt a parasympathetic innervation to the heart and the stomach. 

This is a procedure called a vagotomy, it leads to unopposed sympathetic cardiac stimulation. So basically at rest, your heart wants to beat at about 110 or 120 beats per minute, but it does not because it's constantly stimulated at a low level by the vagus nerve and that makes the resting heart rate about 70 to 80. If you disrupt the vagus nerve, then the resting heart rate will rise. In addition, if you disrupt the vagus nerve, there's no parasympathetic innervation to the stomach and this shuts down acid production.

Years ago, before there were also medications, patients would have vagotomy, in other words, surgeons would cut their cranial nerve 10 in order to shut down acid production in the stomach in an attempt to improve ulcers. But the big picture here to remember is that severing cranial nerve 10 has very little effect in the system overall, because the aortic arch isn't good at signaling low blood pressure, the main effect is to cut off parasympathetic innervation to the heart and the stomach. 

Now let's talk about coronary blood flow because blood flow in the coronary arteries has some special properties. So shown on the screen here is a classic slide that you can find in many physiology textbooks. At the top of the image is the aortic pressure and you can see that when the QRS complex occurs, systole begins and the aortic pressure rises. And this is when most blood flow in organs in the body occurs. As the pressure rises, that's more driving force and so if you look at blood flow through most organs in the body, it occurs in systole. 

The coronary arteries are special, this is coronary blood flow shown at the bottom of the screen. During systole, which is right here, you actually have relatively low flow in the coronary arteries and most of the blood flow in the coronary arteries occurs here, which is in diastole that's very unusual. The reason for this is because when the myocardium contracts in systole, it actually diminishes blood flow, that's why you see this funny shape to the curve here. And then blood flow goes up to a higher level in diastole so the coronary arteries are special in that most of the blood flow occurs in diastole.

This also means that when the heart is tachycardic, for example in the setting of infection or trauma, diastole is shorter, there's less time spent and diastole, so blood flow in the coronary arteries actually declines in the setting of tachycardia because of less time in diastole. For this reason, the blood vessels have to respond by vasodilating and we'll talk more about that in a minute.

Shown on the left side of the screen is a drawing of the coronary arteries. Note that they sit on the outside of the heart, this is called the epicardium. Furthest away from the epicardium is the subendocardium, this is this layer on the inside of the chambers of the heart like the left and right ventricle. It's important that you understand that the coronary arteries are out here and the subendocardium is the furthest away from those vessels. 

This means that the subendocardium receives relatively less blood flow compared to the epicardium and importantly, the subendocardium is the most vulnerable to ischemia if there's a fallen coronary blood flow as occurs in angina and other ischemic syndromes, the most vulnerable portion is the subendocardium, this layer here on the inside of the chambers of the heart. 

This table lists some special features of the blood flow to different organs. So the lung receives 100% of the cardiac output. Remember, all of the cardiac output goes through the lungs, and then it drains to the left atrium and left ventricle and then goes to the body. The liver receives the largest portion of the systemic blood flow of any organ. The kidneys received the highest blood flow by weight. 

And then finally, the heart is famous as the organ that extracts the most oxygen from blood. The heart extracts about 80% of the oxygen from blood. What this means is that when the heart has increased demand for oxygen, it cannot meet that demand by taking more oxygen out of the blood because it's already maximally doing that. Therefore, the only way the heart can increase oxygen supplies through vasodilation, this is the major mechanism by which the heart increases the blood delivery to the myocardium. 

Some tissue beds and organs in the human body have a special property called autoregulation that allows these organs to maintain constant blood flow over a range of blood pressures. So when these organs when blood pressure goes up, this transiently increases the flow, but that increase in flow is sensed by the organ, and in response, blood vessels vasoconstrict and bring the flow back down to the normal range. 

And the way these tissue beds and organs work is that they use the levels of local metabolites to sense the blood pressure in the blood flow, and they use that to modify the degree of vasoconstriction. So what you would expect to see if you graphed blood flow versus blood pressure, for example, if blood pressure were on the x axis and flow were here, what you should see is as blood pressure goes up, flow should go up because blood pressure is the driving force. But in these organs what you see is that as blood pressure goes up, flow is constant and the reason is because of autoregulation. 

Shown on this table are some organs in the body and some details about how they auto regulate. So the heart and the brain are famous as excellent autoregulators, the heart can sense levels of carbon dioxide, adenosine and nitric oxide. And the brain can sense carbon dioxide and pH levels and these two organs use these elements in the bloodstream to determine the blood flow in the vasoconstrictor vasodilate to keep blood flow constant. 

The kidneys are also excellent at autoregulation, the kidneys can sense blood pressure. I mentioned earlier that the kidneys have baroreceptors, the kidneys can also sense the amount of sodium chloride being delivered to the macula densa. And through both of these mechanisms, the kidneys can maintain constant blood flow over a range of blood pressures. 

The lungs have some unusual local factors that lead to autoregulation. When there is hypoxia in the lungs, this leads to vasoconstriction. This is a unique property of the lungs, most tissue beds vasodilate in the setting of hypoxia to bring in more blood but not the lungs. The idea here is that when there is hypoxia in the lungs, the lungs do not want blood flow going to those regions because they may not have adequate ventilation. 

Skeletal muscle can auto regulate by sensing levels of lactate, adenosine and potassium. And then finally, I want to mention the skin, so the skin has poor autoregulatory capacity. Basically blood flow in the skin is very dependent on blood pressure in the body. The only exception I want to mention here is that the sympathetic nervous system innervates the skin so when your sympathetic nervous system is activated, your skin can become cool because the skin has innervation by the system, and vasoconstriction occurs. 

The last topic for this video is capillary fluid exchange. So as you know, blood flows into capillaries in the body and then exits the capillaries into the venous system. And as blood moves through those capillaries, blood and tissue elements need to move into and out of the capillaries. So what forces control this movement? 

Well, it turns out there are two forces that drive fluid into or out of capillaries. The first force is called the hydrostatic pressure, this is denoted by a capital letter P and down in my drawing here, I've got a capillary and the surrounding interstitial space, P sub c denotes the hydrostatic pressure in the capillary. P sub i denotes the hydrostatic pressure in the interstitial space. 

The hydrostatic pressure is the pressure generated by molecules against the capillary walls, this is like your blood pressure. And this pressure tends to be higher in the capillary than in the interstitial space so it tends to push fluid out of the capillaries. The second of the two forces that control fluid movement into and out of capillaries is the oncotic pressure, which is denoted by pi. 

Shown in my drawing I've got pi sub c here for the oncotic pressure in the capillaries, and pi sub i out here for the oncotic pressure in the interstitial space. Solutes, especially albumin, are found in the capillaries and they tend to draw fluid into the capillaries. Albumin cannot cross out of the capillaries, so it's gets stuck behind and there's a lot of albumin in here and that tends to draw fluid in. 

So this oncotic pressure tends to be higher in the capillaries and lower in the interstitial space, and it resists the movement of fluid out of the capillaries. So what we've got is hydrostatic pressure pushing fluid out, oncotic pressure resisting that movement out and trying to hold fluid in. The balance of these two forces determines whether fluid will move into capillaries and out of tissue beds or out of capillaries and in into tissue beds. 

So I've summarized these points in this slide, hydrostatic pressure is the pressure of fluid pushing against the walls of capillaries. And a high value for hydrostatic pressure drives fluid toward a low value for hydrostatic pressure.

In contrast, oncotic pressure is the pressure of solutes pulling fluid into the capillaries. And one confusing thing about oncotic pressure is that a high pressure draws fluid away from a low pressure. This is different than the situation for hydrostatic pressure. And this will make more sense to you in a minute when I go through some numbers.

So let's look at the bottom of the screen here. Now that we understand the two types of pressure, we can actually determine a net pressure driving fluid out of the capillaries that will be equal to the difference between hydrostatic pressure in the capillary and the interstitium minus the difference in the oncotic pressure in a capillary in the interstitium.

This will give us a net pressure driving fluid out of the capillary, and then we can determine the flow which will be equal to the net pressure times a constant, which is related to the permeability of the capillary wall. 

So you may find this easier to understand if we just put some numbers in, so if we say that Pc is 100, and Pi is 50, and pi C is 50, and pi i is 30, then the net pressure difference is 50 minus 20 or 30. So we have a positive net pressure, which means fluid is going to move on balance out of the capillaries, because the hydrostatic pressure driving fluid out is 50 and the oncotic pressure pulling fluid in is only 20.

And then if we multiply that net pressure of 30 by a permeability factor Kf, we could determine the flow. No one ever actually does this and calculates the flow, this is just to give you a concept of all the different factors that can dictate fluid movement into or out of capillaries.

And one of the major clinical applications of the principle of capillary movement is edema, this is very common in a number of disorders. Edema occurs when there is excess fluid movement out of capillaries, this leads to tissue swelling. 

If you have excess movement out of capillaries in the lungs that causes pulmonary edema, this occurs in heart failure in a number of other conditions. If you have excess movement of fluid out of the systemic capillaries, then gravity will draw all that fluid down to the ankles and the lower extremities and you will get lower extremity edema as shown in this picture here. That also occurs in heart failure and some other disorders and all of these problems have to do with alterations of those variables leading to excess movement out of the capillaries and into tissue beds.

So many students find this equation at the top of the screen confusing. Luckily, you don't really need to know it, all you need to know is what happens in different pathologic conditions to modify this equation and drive fluid out of capillaries.

So when the capillary hydrostatic pressure goes up P sub c, that leads to pulmonary edema and lower extremity edema, that's what happens in heart failure. And I talked about this in the heart failure videos.

If you have a loss of plasma proteins, you will get a very low pi sub c. That can happen in the nephrotic syndrome and liver failure where you have low levels of proteins in the blood. If the permeability of the capillary to fluids becomes increased, that can lead to edema, and that's what happens when patients are exposed to toxins or when they have certain types of infections or burns. In all these situations, capillary permeability rises, and that's the mechanism of edema formation.

And then finally, if you have increased interstitial osmotic pressure, pi sub i, this will tend to draw fluid out of the capillaries and cause edema. And that's what happens when there's an obstruction of the lymphatic system. All the proteins in the interstitial space drain into the lymphatic system. If it's obstructed, proteins will build up out here and that will draw fluid out of the capillaries.

I'll finish with this slide and mention a term that you will hear many times on your clinical rotations and that term is third spacing. This is a term we use to describe when patients have excess capillary leak for any reason.

So this term gets its name because the intracellular fluid is said to be the first space, that's about two thirds of your body fluid. The extracellular fluid is the second space, it's about one third of your body fluid. So the third space are spaces in the body where fluid should not be, they normally have no body volume, but they will accumulate fluid in certain pathologic conditions.

So on your clinical rotations, you will hear residents in attending say, "This patient is third spacing." What they mean is fluid is moving into places where it should not be, for example, the patient may have pleural effusions or ascites or cerebral edema. They may have low intravascular volume, but high total volume because all of the volume is found in the tissue beds.

And there are a number of systemic inflammatory conditions like post-op state or sepsis, where basically all the capillaries in the body begin to leak and that's when third spacing occurs. 

So I say this to you now, just so you've heard this term when you get to your clinical rotations.

And that concludes our video on regulation of blood pressure.