02 Cardiac Physiology
---

Hello everybody and welcome to our module on cardiac physiology.

On the screen is an echocardiogram of the left ventricle of a patient's heart. You can see there are QRS complexes rolling along the bottom of the screen. And each time there's a QRS complex, the walls of the left ventricle thicken and move towards the middle. When this happens, it shrinks the volume inside the left ventricle and pushes blood out into the aorta. So in this module, we're gonna talk about the changes in volume and the other physiological changes that occur as the heart goes through the cardiac cycle and moves blood out of the left ventricle.

As we saw in the moving image in the last slide, the volume in the left ventricle is changing during the cardiac cycle. However, there are two important volumes when it comes to understanding cardiac physiology. The first one is the end-diastolic volume or the EDV. This is the volume at the end of diastole. That's how it gets its name. This is the point in the cardiac cycle where filling of the left ventricle has completed. This is the largest volume of blood the left ventricle will hold. This is also the point where contraction is about to begin.

The other important volume is the end-systolic volume or the ESV. This is the volume at the end of systole. That's where it gets its name. This is the point in the cardiac cycle where emptying has been completed. This is the smallest volume that the left ventricle will hold. This is also the point in the cardiac cycle where relaxation is beginning.

So now that we understand that we can understand some other important terms as related to cardiac physiology. And the first one is the stroke volume. This is the difference between the end-diastolic volume and the end-systolic volume. It's the amount of blood pushed out of the left ventricle with each heartbeat. It's the difference between the largest volume the left ventricle holds and the smallest volume it holds. Another important term is the ejection fraction sometimes called the EF. This is the stroke volume divided by the end-diastolic volume. In other words, it is the percentage of blood pushed out of the left ventricle with each heartbeat. And a normal ejection fraction is about 55 to 60%. Our hearts don't normally eject 100% of the blood present in the left ventricle. With each heartbeat they only eject about 60% under normal circumstances.

The cardiac output is the stroke volume times the heart rate. This is the volume of blood pushed out with each heartbeat times the number of heartbeats per minute. When you multiply these two terms together you get a number called the cardiac output which has units of volume per time. For example, liters per minute is a common way to report the cardiac output.

Another important term is the venous return. This is the amount of blood returned to the left ventricle via the venous system. It should be equal to the cardiac output. The amount of blood that is returned to the heart from the body should be equal to the amount that goes out.

The total peripheral resistance is the resistance to blood flow out of the left ventricle that comes from peripheral structures. For example, the organs of the body and the arteries of the body. Importantly, vasoconstriction of peripheral arterioles leads to a rise in the total peripheral resistance. When those vessels constrict, it's harder to push blood through them and there's a greater resistance to flow. And when the peripheral arterioles vasodilate this leads to a fall in total peripheral resistance.

There are some blood pressure terms that are important for understanding cardiac physiology. You may know that we all have a systolic and diastolic blood pressure. And a normal systolic blood pressure is about 120 millimeters of mercury. A normal diastolic blood pressure is about 80 millimeters of mercury.

You should also know that the systolic pressure is largely determined by the stroke volume and the diastolic blood pressure is largely determined by the total peripheral resistance. To understand this, let's imagine that we're tracking the blood pressure as the left ventricle begins to contract and push blood out into the arterial system. What we'll see is that the blood pressure will rise and the height of that rise will be determined by the stroke volume.

In other words, when the left ventricle stops contracting and stops pushing blood into the arterial system the blood pressure will peak. And that peak will be determined by how much blood is pushed out by the left ventricle. The blood pressure will then begin to fall steadily and the depth to which it falls will be determined by the peripheral resistance.

If peripheral vessels are very vasodilated then the pressure will fall greatly. So that there'll be a very low diastolic blood pressure. On the other hand if the peripheral vessels are relatively vasoconstricted then we'll only fall to a lesser degree and thus we will have a higher diastolic blood pressure. So in this manner, the peak of the blood pressure meaning the systolic blood pressure is largely determined by the stroke volume and the depth or the nadir of the blood pressure is largely determined by the total peripheral resistance.

One other important blood pressure term is the pulse pressure. This is the difference between the systolic and diastolic pressure. So for example, for a patient with a normal blood pressure of 120 over 80, the pulse pressure would be 40. And this is also proportional to the stroke volume.

Remember what I told you before, the height of the blood pressure, meaning the maximum value or the systolic pressure is determined by the stroke volume. This means that the difference between these two numbers or the pulse pressure is also determined by the stroke volume.

Another important blood pressure term is the mean arterial pressure or MAP. This is equal to the diastolic pressure plus 1/3 of the difference between the systolic and diastolic pressures, which you may recall is called the pulse pressure.

The reason it's not halfway between the two pressures is because our blood pressure spends more of its time in the diastolic range. If you chart the blood pressure, you will find that it briefly it goes up to the systolic peak, then falls down to the diastolic range and stays down there for a much longer period of time before it climbs again.

This means that in order to calculate the mean you don't simply take the midway point between the bottom and the top. You take 1/3 of the way from the bottom coming closer down to the bottom number because you spend more time down in this range here at the bottom. So for example, if a person had a normal blood pressure of 120 over 80 the mean arterial pressure would be 80 plus 1/3 of the difference between those two, which is 40 and that would work out to 93.3.

Of the cardiac physiology variables we've been discussing, one of the most important is the cardiac output. That's because the cardiac output must rise to meet the demands placed upon the heart by the body. And in many disease states, the disease is caused because the cardiac output is insufficient.

Also remember that the more cardiac output the heart produces the more work it must do and the more oxygen that is required. The cardiac output is equal to the heart rate times the stroke volume. So when the heart rate goes up there are more beats per minute and this is more work the heart must do. In addition, when the stroke volume goes up there's more volume per beat at the heart must pump. And that also means more work that the heart must do. These are very important principles of cardiac physiology for you to understand.

So the four classic determinants of the cardiac output are the preload, the afterload, the contractility and the heart rate. And we'll talk about these one at a time in the next few slides. But I just wanna make a general point here that changes in these four factors affect the cardiac output. And that means that these four factors also affect how much work the heart has to perform.

The preload is the amount of blood loaded into the left ventricle prior to each contraction. That's how it gets its name, the preload. If you've watched the video on the Starling curve you are aware that the more preload that goes into the left ventricle, the harder it will contract. And for that reason, when there's more preload there's more cardiac output. In addition, when there's more preload there's more work the heart must do and more oxygen that is required.

And because of the Starling mechanism preload is sometimes referred to in textbooks as the amount of stretch on the fibers prior to contraction. Some books say length instead of stretch. But all of these are ways of referring to the preload. And the fact that the Starling mechanism dictates that the more the left ventricle is loaded and the fibers are stretched. The more vigorously the left ventricle will contract. And if you find the concept of preload confusing the way I've always explained it to students is to think of a room full of people and the left ventricle's job is to push all those people out into the hallway through a small door. The preload is the amount of people put into the room and you can imagine it, if there are more people in the room, then there's more work that must be done in order to shove them all through the door and into the hallway outside.

So if preload is the amount of blood preloaded into the left ventricle to be pumped, how could you increase the preload to the left ventricle? Well, the easiest ways to add volume to the body. Patients who receive a blood transfusion or intravenous fluids will have increased preloads. These two interventions deliver more fluid to the venous system of the body which goes to the left ventricle. This preloads the left ventricle with more fluid that must be pumped and thus they increase the preload. This means that both of these things will raise the cardiac output. They will also raise the amount of work that the heart must perform. Another way that's not so obvious is to slow the heart rate. When you slow the heart rate there's more time for filling of the left ventricle. Thus it fills with more volume and therefore there is more preload. And then a final way which is very important physiologically is to constrict the veins.

The veins contain a significant amount of fluid that can be pushed into the left ventricle if needed, making them like large storage basins for fluid inside the body. When the sympathetic nervous system is stimulated, alpha-1 receptors in the veins will constrict, pushing lots of blood into the left ventricle. Venous constriction is very important for the response to blood loss because it increases the amount of volume available to the heart and helps to maintain the cardiac output.

To decrease the preload, one can remove volume. Patients who are bleeding or dehydrated have decreased preload on the left ventricle. Alternatively, raising the heart rate allows less time for filling. Pulling blood in the veins is the mechanism of action of drugs called nitrates, which are sometimes used in heart failure and angina. By dilating the veins, they pull blood in the venous system, lowering the preload. This means there is less work for the heart to perform, which can relieve angina.

Preload is often referred to by one of two terms: the left ventricular end-diastolic volume (LVEDV) or the left ventricular end-diastolic pressure. LVEDV is usually used to represent preload, but it is very hard to measure clinically. Instead, clinicians often use the pressure in the left ventricle when filling is completed because it's an easier number to obtain. This is also a measurement of preload on the left ventricle.

The afterload refers to the forces resisting flow out of the left ventricle. The heart must squeeze to raise the pressure in the left ventricle enough to pop open the aortic valve so that blood can be pushed into the aorta. If the blood pressure is high or the aortic valve is stiff, this becomes harder to do, increasing the afterload. There are rare forms of high afterload, such as when things are in the way of blood moving out of the left ventricle. This can occur in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or when patients have a sub-aortic membrane obstructing the outflow of blood.

To increase afterload, one can raise the mean blood pressure or obstruct the outflow of the left ventricle. To decrease the afterload, one can lower the mean blood pressure or treat aortic valve disease or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The more afterload there is, the more work the heart must do, requiring more oxygen.

The contractility refers to how hard the heart muscle squeezes. The ejection fraction is one potential measurement of contractility. The sympathetic nervous system is the major regulator of contractility under physiologic conditions, and there are two mechanisms by which it can increase contractility. The sympathetic nervous system directly innervates the heart, and it can also stimulate the release of catecholamines from the adrenal gland. When either of these mechanisms activates the heart, there is an increase in calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum, increasing contractility.

Classic triggers that increase sympathetic nervous system activity include stress, exercise, and anything else that increases sympathetic nervous system activity. Sympathomimetic drugs like dopamine, dobutamine, epinephrine, and norepinephrine can increase contractility. Digoxin is another non-physiologic way to increase contractility as it inhibits the sodium-potassium ATPase pump, leading to an increased calcium level inside myocytes.

The main way that contractility is decreased is by dialing back the sympathetic nervous system. This can occur naturally when patients enter states where there's less sympathetic activity. It can also occur via the use of drugs. So the main mechanism of sympathetic nervous system blocking drugs like beta blockers on the heart is to decrease contractility and also heart rate, which we'll talk about in a minute. Some calcium channel blockers, especially verapamil and diltiazem also affect contractility. They lead to less calcium being pulled into myocytes and therefore there's less calcium available for muscle contraction and decrease contractility. And then finally, heart failure especially systolic heart failure is a disease of myocytes that results in decreased contractility. That's the defining characteristic of the disease.

Our fourth determinant of cardiac output and the work of the heart is the heart rate. When the heart rate goes up this increases the cardiac output under physiologic conditions. And the main regulators of heart rate. The factors that cause it to increase or decrease are the same ones that affect contractility. In general heart rate and contractility go together. They're both mainly regulated by the sympathetic nervous system. And they are both also affected by sympathomimetic drugs and blocked by drugs like beta blockers.

There is a confusing concept about heart rate and stroke volume that's shown in many cardiac physiology textbooks. And I'll explain this to you in the next few slides in a way that hopefully makes sense. So in the laboratory settings, when you insert pacemakers into the hearts of animals like dogs and you artificially increase their heart rate you see a fall in stroke volume. This is because there's less time for filling of the left ventricle. So the relationship between heart rate and stroke volume experimentally is like what I've shown on the screen. Now this is very counterintuitive. Most of us think of our output of our heart going up when our heart rate rises and this slide indicates the opposite, but keep in mind this is under artificial settings in the laboratory when you're increasing the heart rate without also raising the contractility.

Even in artificial settings like the laboratory where you're pacing the heart of a dog an increase in heart rate over physiologic ranges of heart rates still leads to a rise in cardiac output. That's because even though the stroke volume falls when the heart rate goes up, like I showed you in the last slide, the heart rate rises to a greater degree. And remember cardiac output is equal to the product of stroke volume times heart rate. Thus, if you have a small drop in stroke volume but a greater rise in heart rate then that effect will be to increase cardiac output.

So thus even in the laboratory when you're studying animals and you're pacing their heart as you increase their heart rate, you still see a rise in cardiac output, even though the stroke volume is going down as you raise the heart rate. And that's a confusing concept to make sure you understand that. All of those relationships I just showed you however are artificial because under physiologic circumstances the sympathetic nervous system controls heart rate and contractility and it never raises the heart rate alone without also raising the contractility. What this means is when the sympathetic nervous system raises the heart rate, the stroke volume goes up even though there's less time per filling. There's more contractility such that overall there is a rise in the stroke volume under physiologic conditions when the sympathetic nervous system raises the heart rate.

The one clinical situation where a rise in heart rate can lead to a fall in cardiac output is under pathologic conditions in the setting of some cardiac arrhythmias. There are some cardiac arrhythmias where the heart rate can get very, very high sometimes as high as 300 beats per minute. In this setting, there isn't enough time for the left ventricle to fill. And thus the stroke volume falls and the cardiac output falls. In other words, at these very high heart rates even though the heart rate is increased the stroke volume has dropped dramatically. Thus, the product of stroke volume times heart rate begins to fall. That means the cardiac output gets low.

What this means is that some patients with cardiac arrhythmias can develop hypotension and shock. And this usually happens when the arrhythmia results in a very rapid heart rate. What this means is the true relationship between cardiac output and heart rate is like what I've shown on the screen here. Under the physiologic range of heart rates when the sympathetic nervous system drives an increase in the heart rate, there is an increase in cardiac output. This is because the sympathetic nervous system is increasing contractility in addition to heart rate. And thus the cardiac output is going up. However, if the heart rate gets very, very high for example, in this setting of arrhythmia, you can reach a point where the cardiac output begins to fall. And that's because of the dramatic drop in stroke volume seen when the heart rate gets very, very high.

So to summarize the work of the heart is determined by four key components. The first is the preload, which we often estimate by the left ventricular end-diastolic volume or pressure. The second is the afterload, which is often estimated by the mean arterial blood pressure. The third variable is the contractility which is often estimated by the ejection fraction. And the fourth is the heart rate. And this will be important when we talk about disease states because hearts that are starved for oxygen need to have these factors modified so that there's reduced oxygen demand.

In addition, hearts that are generating a low cardiac output need to have these factors modified so that they increase the work of the heart and increase the cardiac output.

And that concludes our module on cardiac physiology.