09 Starling Curve
---

Hello, everyone. And welcome to our module on Starling curves.

Shown on the screen is the Frank-Starling curve, which shows the relationship between preload to the left ventricle and stroke volume from the left ventricle. And as you know, preload can be measured by either the left ventricular end-diastolic pressure or the left ventricular end-diastolic volume.

So what this curve shows is that the more you load the left ventricle up with fluid, the more it will pump and the higher the stroke volume will be. And it's very good that this relationship exists. Because of this relationship, if you drink more fluid and put more fluid into your vascular system, that fluid will go to your heart and your heart will pump harder.

If this mechanism did not exist and every time we drank a couple of glasses of water, the heart would continue to pump at the same rate and all that extra fluid would pool in our venous system until it could be excreted from the body. However, because of the Frank-Starling mechanism, the more you put into the ventricle, the more it pumps. And this allows our heart to respond to situations where there is higher or lower venous return to the heart.

It's important for you to understand that the Frank-Starling curve and the relationship between left ventricular preload and left ventricular stroke volume is not fixed. There are certain physiologic parameters which can shift the curve either to the left or the right.

For example, on the screen here, imagine that the black line depicts the Frank-Starling curve under normal conditions. There are certain physiologic conditions which will shift the curve to the left as depicted by the green line or to the right as depicted by the yellow line.

So let's talk about what would happen if the curve shifted to the left, as shown in the green line. Imagine if under normal conditions, we give this much preload to the left ventricle. Well, if we're operating on a normal curve shown in black, that means we would generate a stroke volume where I've marked with my pen. However, if physiologic parameters shift the Frank-Starling curve to the left as shown in green, then for that same amount of preload, we would generate a much higher stroke volume.

So shifting the curve to the left means that for a given preload, the heart produces more stroke volume, shifting the curve to the right means that for a given preload, the heart produces less stroke volume. So now let's talk about some of those physiologic parameters that shift the curve left and right.

And the first one, and the easiest to understand is contractility. So when the contractility of the left ventricle increases, that shifts the curve from the black line to the green line, that should make sense to you. If contractility goes up for a given preload, you should produce more stroke volume than under normal conditions because contractility is higher. By the same argument of contractility decreases, that will lower the stroke volume.

The other physiologic parameter that can shift the curve left or right, is a little trickier to understand, and that is peripheral resistance or afterload. When the peripheral resistance to the left ventricle drops, in other words, when afterload decreases, it makes it easier for the heart to push blood forward.

This means that for a given preload, the heart can produce a higher stroke volume when peripheral resistance is low compared to normal. By the same arguments, if peripheral resistance increases, in other words, if the afterload goes up, that will shift the curve to the right.

So in summary, the major parameters that shift the Starling curve, either left or right, or contractility or peripheral resistance, they change the Starling curve as I've shown in this slide on the screen.

So what are some of the circumstances where contractility might change? While contractility increases, in the setting of exercise or in patients who are receiving inotropes, these things can shift the Starling curve to the left. Contractility decreases in the setting of myocardial infarction or heart failure, these things can shift the curve to the right.

Let's talk about what might change peripheral resistance. First of all, there is a little bit of terminology used to refer to peripheral resistance. Sometimes it's called the total peripheral resistance or TPR, other textbooks will call it the systemic vascular resistance or SVR, but in either case, they're talking about the forces that resist the flow of blood out of the left ventricle.

So the peripheral resistance can increase in patients receiving vasopressors. It can decrease in patients receiving Vasodilators or patients who have sepsis. These things can shift the Starling curve either to the left or the right.

Closely related to Starling curves are another set of curves known as venous return curves. These curves depict the relationship between right atrial pressure and venous return to the heart. In order to understand venous return curves.

Let's take a look at the drawing I've made in the screen here. This drawing shows the relationship between pressure in the right atrium and venous return to the heart. In order to understand this relationship, you need to appreciate that venous return must be equal to cardiac output. The blood that is returned to the heart must equal the blood that is pumped out of the heart.

For that reason, the X axis on this curve could be either the venous return to the heart or the cardiac output. The two terms are interchangeable. And this curve indicates that as the venous return or cardiac output increases, the right atrial pressure falls.

So let's try to understand why that is the case. Let's look at this drawing I've made in the screen, the right atrium is here, where I'm marking with my pen. It is connected to the venous system of the body by the SVC above and the IVC below. And there are no valves between the right atrium and the venous system of the body.

And for that reason, the pressure in the right atrium is equal to the central venous pressure. In other words, the pressure in the right atrium is equal to the pressure in the venous system of the body. When the cardiac output goes up and the ventricles begin pumping more blood, that pulls more blood out of the right atrium in the venous system and that lowers the right atrial pressure.

For this reason, when venous return or cardiac output rises, right atrial pressure falls. And that's the relationship we saw in the last slide. For reasons that I'll explain in a minute, venous return curves are not usually drawn the way I showed you two slides ago.

Instead, they're usually drawn as I've shown on this slide with right atrial pressure on the X axis and venous return or cardiac output on the Y axis. When the curves are drawn this way, it can be confusing. That's because the easiest way to understand these curves is to think of venous return or cardiac output as the independent variable and right atrial pressure as the dependent variable.

But nevertheless, the curves are usually this way, and this is the way that you need to understand them. When the venous return curve is drawn like this, there's a very important pressure at the bottom of the screen. The point where this curve intersects the X axis is called the mean systemic filling pressure or MSFP. That is the pressure that would be present in the venous system of the body if the heart stops.

In other words, it's the pressure if the cardiac output fell to zero, and that's a very important pressure defined by the volume in the venous system and the tone of the veins in the body. Just like there are physiologic parameters that can shift the Starling curve left or right, there are also parameters that can shift the venous return curve left and right.

Let's imagine that we have a normal venous return curve as shown in black on the screen here. A shift to the right would look like the curve shown in green. This could happen if we were to increase blood volume. For example, if we infused a unit of blood, or if we infused a liter of normal saline, this will add volume to the venous system of the body. And remember the venous system is connected to the right atrium.

So therefore when we add blood volume, we increase the right atrial pressure and shift the venous return curve to the right. Also, if we were to constrict the veins, in other words, if we were to increase the venous tone, this would also raise the pressure in the venous system of the body and therefore move the right atrial pressure higher. This shifts the curve to the right. By the reverse arguments, if you were to decrease blood volume or dilate the veins. In other words, decrease the venous tone that would shift the curve to the left as shown in yellow on the screen.

So I've bolded at the top right side of the screen, the words, volume and venous tone. These are the things that can shift the venous return curve left, or right. There is also one physiologic parameter that can change the slope of the venous return curve. And that is the total peripheral resistance.

So let's try to understand this now. Let's imagine that we're operating at this cardiac output here, which I will label A. And let's imagine that we're operating on the normal venous return curve shown in black. At cardiac output A, we will generate right atrial pressure A, which I'm marking at the bottom of the screen.

Now let's imagine there's an increase in total peripheral resistance, because of this rise in TPR, at cardiac output A, we will not be able to as completely fill the venous system of the body. For this reason, there will be a fall in venous pressure and therefore a fall in right atrial pressure when the total peripheral resistance is higher. This means that an increase in TPR will shift the venous return curve to the left as shown by the curve in yellow.

The rise in TPR, however, cannot move the MSFP. Remember that is the pressure if the heart stops. It is not affected by peripheral resistance. And therefore it stays the same as under normal conditions. This means that a rise in total peripheral resistance shifts the venous return curve to the left as shown in yellow while leaving the MSFP unchanged. And therefore the slope of the venous return curve changes when peripheral resistance goes up.

The reverse happens when total peripheral resistance falls, that shifts the venous return curve to the curve shown in green. And I've summarized the important points you wanna remember at the bottom of the screen.

TPR changes shift the curve left or right with no change in MSFP. The result is a change in the slope of the venous return curve.

The reason cardiac output or venous return are placed on the Y axis of the venous return curve is because once you do this, you can then overlay the Starling curve and the venous return curve. Remember the Y axis of the Starling curve is stroke volume and stroke volume is proportional to cardiac output.

And as we discussed before, cardiac output is equal to venous return. Therefore, the Starling curve and the venous return curve have the same Y axis. And you can overlay one on top of the other.

When you do this, the Y axis is either right atrial pressure or preload. And these curves, with Starling and venous return combined were a breakthrough in the 1960s when they were initially described experimentally.

At the time, people were debating whether the Starling curve or the venous return curve determines the cardiac output. When the curves were put together, this settled the issue by showing that the cardiac output is determined by the point where the two curves intersect. This means that the Starling curve can influence the cardiac output, but so can the venous return curve.

The intersection of those two curves determines where a vascular system will operate. The other reason physiologists like to overlay the Starling curve and the venous return curve is because when you do this, you can show all the changes that occur in certain clinical scenarios. And there are a number of classic combined venous return and Starling curves that represent clinical scenarios that you need to know as a medical student.

So we'll go through those one at a time now, and we'll start with heart failure. Shown on the screen in black is a normal patient, in red is a patient with heart failure.

So let's try to make sense of this. In heart failure, the primary problem, as you know, is a fall in contractility of the left ventricle. That is represented by a shift to the right of the Starling curve as shown in the screen.

The fallen contractility leads to a fall in cardiac output. And this activates the sympathetic nervous system that leads to retention of fluid volume in heart failure. In addition, it raises the total peripheral resistance as the sympathetic nervous system clamps down on arterials.

The rise in fluid volume will shift the venous return curve to the right. And the change in peripheral resistance will modify the slope of the venous return curve. Thus, you will get all the changes shown in the screen and going from the black lines to the red lines.

And I've cleared away my ink now so I can just show you that the normal patient has this cardiac output right here. The patient in heart failure has a lower cardiac output, and that should make sense to you. In addition, the normal patient has a lower right atrial pressure compared to the heart failure patient. And that's because in heart failure, the right atrial pressure goes up as do all the pressures inside the heart.

So if you get confused in a question on combined venous return and Starling curves, just try to step back and make sure your answer makes intuitive sense. Whichever curves represent heart failure should indicate a fall in cardiac output and arise in the cardiac pressures. As you know, occurs in the setting of heart failure.

Another classic set of curves has to do with hemorrhage. So in hemorrhage, the primary problem is blood loss. This will shift the venous return curve to the left as shown in this picture and going from the black lines to the red lines. In response, the sympathetic nervous system is activated. That will increase the peripheral resistance and increase contractility of the left ventricle. The shift in contractility moves the Starling curve to the left. The change in peripheral resistance modifies the slope of the venous return curve.

Thus, you get all the changes shown on the slide here. And once again, I've cleared away my ink so I can show you that we begin at this point here, and we moved to this point here. This represents a fall in the cardiac output, and that's what you expect in the setting of blood loss. In addition, we begin with this right atrial pressure and fell to a lower right atrial pressure. That should also make sense to you.

When there is blood loss, the pressures in the chambers of the heart will fall. Exercise is another classic combined venous return and Starling curve. So in exercise, there is decreased afterload. I explained the mechanism of this in the video on cardiac physiology. In addition, there is activation of the sympathetic nervous system that leads to venous contraction and increased contractility.

So if you look at these curves over here, what happens is the contractility goes up. So that shifts the Starling curve to the left. There is venous contraction, which moves the venous return curve to the right. There's also a fall in TPR so that changes the slope of the venous return curve. So we get all these changes I've shown right here. And the net result is that we move from a low cardiac output to a high cardiac output, which is what you expect to happen during exercise.

AV fistulas have the same hemodynamic consequences as exercise. The primary effect of AV fistulas is to decrease the afterload or lower the total peripheral resistance. To understand why peripheral resistance falls in the setting of an AV fistula, you have to appreciate that under normal conditions, the arterial system and the venous system are not directly connected.

The only way they can communicate with one another is by pushing blood through the arterials. The arterials are resistance vessels, and therefore they lower the pressure as blood moves from the arteries to the veins. When you have an AV fistula, you have a direct connection from the arteries to the veins that does not go through the resistance vessels, this results in a flood of blood moving into the venous system.

And it results in a way of bypassing the arterials, which are the resistance vessels. Therefore, the total peripheral resistance falls significantly in the setting of an AV fistula. Just like with exercise, the fall in afterload leads to activation of the sympathetic nervous system.

This will increase contractility of the left ventricle. It will also lead to venous contraction. So it produces the same effects that are seen in exercise. The increase in contractility moves the Starling curve to the left. The venous contraction shifts the venous return curve to the right and the change in peripheral resistance modifies the slope of the venous return curve.

What we're left with is a system that moves from a lower cardiac output to a higher cardiac output. The administration of vasopressors will increase the afterload or the peripheral resistance. And this will alter both the venous return curves and the Starling curves.

I told you before that when the afterload goes up, it shifts to Starling curve to the right as shown in going from black to green in this image. In addition, I told you that when the peripheral resistance goes up, it shifts the venous return curve to the left, but the MSFP stays fixed. Therefore, the slope of the venous return curve changes. So you get all the changes that I've shown in going from black to green in this image on the screen.

The net result is that you move from a higher cardiac output to a lower cardiac output. And that should make sense to you. when peripheral resistance goes up, it's harder for the left ventricle to pump blood and therefore the cardiac output falls.

Sometimes you are asked to interpret combined Starling and venous return curves, where actual numbers are given for the X and Y axis. To understand how to do this, let's try to solve this problem on the screen here for a patient operating on Starling curve A with an MSFP of 10, what is the cardiac output?

So they've told you that the patient is operating on Starling curve A, which is the green Starling curve. They've also told you that the mean systemic filling pressure is 10. This means that the patient must be operating on the yellow venous return curve. Those two curves intersect at this point here, which is associated with a cardiac output a little less than five.

So that would be the answer to this question. And this is how you solve problems when they give you actual numbers to define the Starling in venous return curves.

And that concludes our module on Starling curves.