File: 02 Cardiac Physiology
---

Hello everybody and welcome to our module
on cardiac physiology.
On the screen is an echocardiogram
of the left ventricle of a patient's heart.
You can see there are QRS complexes
rolling along the bottom of the screen.
And each time there's a QRS complex,
the walls of the left ventricle thicken
and move towards the middle.
When this happens, it shrinks the volume
inside the left ventricle
and pushes blood out into the aorta.
So in this module, we're gonna talk about the changes
in volume and the other physiological changes that occur
as the heart goes through the cardiac cycle
and moves blood out of the left ventricle.
As we saw in the moving image in the last slide,
the volume in the left ventricle is changing
during the cardiac cycle.
However, there are two important volumes
when it comes to understanding cardiac physiology.
The first one is the end-diastolic volume or the EDV.
This is the volume at the end of diastole.
That's how it gets its name.
This is the point in the cardiac cycle
where filling of the left ventricle has completed.
This is the largest volume of blood
the left ventricle will hold.
This is also the point where contraction is about to begin.
The other important volume is the end-systolic volume
or the ESV.
This is the volume at the end of systole.
That's where it gets its name.
This is the point in the cardiac cycle
where emptying has been completed.
This is the smallest volume
that the left ventricle will hold.
This is also the point in the cardiac cycle
where relaxation is beginning.
So now that we understand that
we can understand some other important terms
as related to cardiac physiology.
And the first one is the stroke volume.
This is the difference between the end-diastolic volume
and the end-systolic volume.
It's the amount of blood pushed out of the left ventricle
with each heartbeat.
It's the difference between the largest volume
the left ventricle holds and the smallest volume it holds.
Another important term is the ejection fraction
sometimes called the EF.
This is the stroke volume
divided by the end-diastolic volume.
In other words, it is the percentage of blood
pushed out of the left ventricle with each heartbeat.
And a normal ejection fraction is about 55 to 60%.
Our hearts don't normally eject 100% of the blood
present in the left ventricle.
With each heartbeat they only eject about 60%
under normal circumstances.
And then finally the cardiac output
is the stroke volume times the heart rate.
This is the volume of blood pushed out with each heartbeat
times the number of heartbeats per minute.
When you multiply these two terms together
you get a number called the cardiac output
which has units of volume per time.
For example, liters per minute
is a common way to report the cardiac output.
Another important term is the venous return.
This is the amount of blood returned
to the left ventricle via the venous system.
It should be equal to the cardiac output.
The amount of blood that is returned to the heart
from the body should be equal to the amount that goes out.
And then another important term
is the total peripheral resistance.
This is the resistance to blood flow
out of the left ventricle
that comes from peripheral structures.
For example, the organs of the body
and the arteries of the body.
Importantly, vasoconstriction of peripheral arterioles
leads to a rise in the total peripheral resistance.
When those vessels constrict, it's harder to push blood
through them and there's a greater resistance to flow.
And when the peripheral arterioles vasodilate
this leads to a fall in total peripheral resistance.
There are some blood pressure terms that are important
for understanding cardiac physiology.
You may know that we all have a systolic
and diastolic blood pressure.
And a normal systolic blood pressure
is about 120 millimeters of mercury.
A normal diastolic blood pressure
is about 80 millimeters of mercury.
You should also know that the systolic pressure
is largely determined by the stroke volume
and the diastolic blood pressure is largely determined
by the total peripheral resistance.
To understand this,
let's imagine that we're tracking the blood pressure
as the left ventricle begins to contract
and push blood out into the arterial system.
What we'll see is that the blood pressure will rise
and the height of that rise
will be determined by the stroke volume.
In other words, when the left ventricle stops contracting
and stops pushing blood into the arterial system
the blood pressure will peak.
And that peak will be determined
by how much blood is pushed out by the left ventricle.
The blood pressure will then begin to fall steadily
and the depth to which it falls
will be determined by the peripheral resistance.
If peripheral vessels are very vasodilated
then the pressure will fall greatly.
So that there'll be a very low diastolic blood pressure.
On the other hand
if the peripheral vessels are relatively vasoconstricted
then we'll only fall to a lesser degree
and thus we will have a higher diastolic blood pressure.
So in this manner, the peak of the blood pressure
meaning the systolic blood pressure is largely determined
by the stroke volume and the depth
or the nadir of the blood pressure
is largely determined by the total peripheral resistance.
One other important blood pressure term
is the pulse pressure.
This is the difference between the systolic
and diastolic pressure.
So for example, for a patient with a normal blood pressure
of 120 over 80, the pulse pressure would be 40.
And this is also proportional to the stroke volume.
Remember what I told you before,
the height of the blood pressure, meaning the maximum value
or the systolic pressure is determined by the stroke volume.
This means that the difference between these two numbers
or the pulse pressure
is also determined by the stroke volume.
Another important blood pressure term
is the mean arterial pressure or MAP.
This is equal to the diastolic pressure
plus 1/3 of the difference between the systolic
and diastolic pressures,
which you may recall is called the pulse pressure.
The reason it's not halfway between the two pressures
is because our blood pressure spends more of its time
in the diastolic range.
If you chart the blood pressure,
you will find that it briefly
it goes up to the systolic peak,
then falls down to the diastolic range
and stays down there for a much longer period of time
before it climbs again.
This means that in order to calculate the mean
you don't simply take the midway point between the bottom
and the top.
You take 1/3 of the way from the bottom
coming closer down to the bottom number
because you spend more time down in this range here
at the bottom.
So for example, if a person had a normal blood pressure
of 120 over 80 the mean arterial pressure
would be 80 plus 1/3 of the difference between those two,
which is 40 and that would work out to 93.3.
Of the cardiac physiology variables we've been discussing,
one of the most important is the cardiac output.
That's because the cardiac output must rise
to meet the demands placed upon the heart by the body.
And in many disease states, the disease is caused
because the cardiac output is insufficient.
Also remember that the more cardiac output
the heart produces the more work it must do
and the more oxygen that is required.
The cardiac output is equal to the heart rate
times the stroke volume.
So when the heart rate goes up there are more beats
per minute and this is more work the heart must do.
In addition, when the stroke volume goes up
there's more volume per beat at the heart must pump.
And that also means more work that the heart must do.
These are very important principles
of cardiac physiology for you to understand.
So the four classic determinants of the cardiac output
are the preload, the afterload, the contractility
and the heart rate.
And we'll talk about these one at a time
in the next few slides.
But I just wanna make a general point here
that changes in these four factors
affect the cardiac output.
And that means that these four factors
also affect how much work the heart has to perform.
The preload is the amount of blood loaded
into the left ventricle prior to each contraction.
That's how it gets its name, the preload.
If you've watched the video on the Starling curve
you are aware that the more preload
that goes into the left ventricle,
the harder it will contract.
And for that reason, when there's more preload
there's more cardiac output.
In addition, when there's more preload
there's more work the heart must do
and more oxygen that is required.
And because of the Starling mechanism
preload is sometimes referred to in textbooks
as the amount of stretch on the fibers prior to contraction.
Some books say length instead of stretch.
But all of these are ways of referring to the preload.
And the fact that the Starling mechanism
dictates that the more the left ventricle is loaded
and the fibers are stretched.
The more vigorously the left ventricle will contract.
And if you find the concept of preload confusing
the way I've always explained it to students
is to think of a room full of people
and the left ventricle's job
is to push all those people out into the hallway
through a small door.
The preload is the amount of people put into the room
and you can imagine it, if there are more people
in the room, then there's more work that must be done
in order to shove them all through the door
and into the hallway outside.
So if preload is the amount of blood preloaded
into the left ventricle to be pumped,
how could you increase the preload to the left ventricle?
Well, the easiest ways to add volume to the body.
Patients who receive a blood transfusion
or intravenous fluids will have increased preloads.
These two interventions deliver more fluid
to the venous system of the body
which goes to the left ventricle.
This preloads the left ventricle with more fluid
that must be pumped and thus they increase the preload.
This means that both of these things
will raise the cardiac output.
They will also raise the amount of work
that the heart must perform.
Another way that's not so obvious is to slow the heart rate.
When you slow the heart rate
there's more time for filling of the left ventricle.
Thus it fills with more volume
and therefore there is more preload.
And then a final way
which is very important physiologically
is to constrict the veins.
The veins are like large storage basins
for fluid inside the body.
They contain a significant amount of fluid
that can be pushed into the left ventricle if needed.
So when the sympathetic nervous system is stimulated
alpha-1 receptors in the veins will react and constrict
and they will push lots of blood into the left ventricle.
This is very important for the response to blood loss.
Venous constriction increases the amount of volume
available to the heart
and helps to maintain the cardiac output
in the setting of blood loss.
To decrease the preload you do the opposite
of the three mechanisms I just discussed.
You can remove volume.
Patients who are bleeding or dehydrated
have decreased preload on the left ventricle.
You can raise the heart rate.
This allows less time for filling the opposite mechanism
we talked about before.
In addition, you can pull blood in the veins
and this is the mechanism of action of drugs called nitrates
which are sometimes used in heart failure.
And in an angina they dilate the veins
and they pull blood in the venous system.
This pulls blood away from the heart.
This lowers the preload.
There's less work for the heart to perform.
And for this reason, it can relieve angina.
A couple of important terms regarding preload.
Preload is often not called preload.
It's usually referred to by one of the two terms
I've shown in the screen here.
The first one is the LVEDV.
That's the left ventricular end-diastolic volume.
This is the volume I talked about
at the beginning of this module.
It's the volume of blood in the left ventricle
when it's completed its filling phase.
It's the largest volume of blood
that the left ventricle will hold during the cardiac cycle.
That is an indication of how much the left ventricle
has been preloaded.
And thus the LVEDV is usually used to represent the preload.
Now in clinical practice,
it's very hard to measure the LVEDV.
However, it's much easier to measure the pressure at the end
of diastole, the left ventricular end-diastolic pressure.
So instead of using the volume
we often use the pressure clinically
because it's simply an easier number to obtain.
This is the pressure in the left ventricle
when filling is completed.
This is also a measurement of the preload
on the left ventricle.
The afterload are the forces resisting flow
out of the left ventricle.
Remember that the heart must squeeze
in order to raise the pressure in the left ventricle.
It needs to raise the pressure enough to pop open
the aortic valve so that blood can be pushed into the aorta.
This is harder to do
if for example the blood pressure is high.
Blood pressure is one of the determinants of afterload.
This is also harder to do if the aortic valve is stiff.
Aortic stenosis is a classic condition
where the afterload increases.
There are also some rare forms of high afterload
such as when things are in the way of blood
moving out of the left ventricle.
This can occur in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
It can also occur in rare conditions
like when patients have a sub-aortic membrane
obstructing the outflow of blood,
but all of these things raise the amount of work
that the heart must do in order to move blood
out of the left ventricle.
And just like with preload
an easy analogy to understand afterload
is to think of a bunch of people in a room
and it's the left ventricle's job
to push them through a doorway into the hallway outside.
The afterload is high if there are already a lot of people
in the hallway outside.
It's obviously gonna be harder to move those people
out of the room and into the hallway.
That's what happens when your blood pressure is high.
There's already a lot of high pressure
in molecules outside of the heart
and therefore it's harder to move blood out of the way.
It's also harder to move those people out of the room
and into the hallway if the door is stiff
and won't open and that's what happens in aortic stenosis.
So these are ways you can think of the concept of afterload.
So just like we did with preload,
let's talk about ways we could increase
or decrease the afterload.
So one of the ways to increase the afterload
is to raise the mean blood pressure.
The mean blood pressure is one major determinant
of the afterload of the left ventricle.
Another way to increase the afterload
is to obstruct the outflow of left ventricle.
In some manner, this is what happens when patients
have aortic stenosis or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
To decrease the afterload we could do the opposite
of the two things I mentioned on the last slide.
We could lower the mean blood pressure.
We could treat the aortic valve disease
or the hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
And the principle here is
that more afterload means more work the heart must do
and therefore more oxygen that is required.
Now let's talk about the third determinant
of cardiac output and that is the contractility.
This is how hard the heart muscle squeezes.
And the ejection fraction is one potential measurement
of contractility.
When the ejection fraction goes up,
it means that the left ventricle
is contracting more vigorously and pushing more blood
out of the left ventricle with each heartbeat.
And the major regulator of contractility
is the sympathetic nervous system.
This is the major regulator under physiologic conditions
of both contractility and also heart rate
which we'll talk about in a minute.
The main physiologic mechanism
by which contractility is increased
is via sympathetic nervous system activity.
There are two mechanisms
by which the sympathetic nervous system
can increase contractility.
First of all, the sympathetic nervous system
directly innervates the heart.
In addition, the sympathetic nervous system
can stimulate the release of catecholamines
from the adrenal gland.
Those can circulate and reach the heart.
Those include substances like epinephrine
and norepinephrine.
When either of these mechanisms activates the heart
there's increase calcium release
from the sarcoplasmic reticulum
and this will increase the contractility.
So some classic triggers are stress,
also exercise which we'll talk about later.
Anything that increases sympathetic nervous system activity.
A non physiologic way
by which contractility can be increased
is via the use of sympathomimetic drugs.
These are drugs like dopamine, dobutamine, epinephrin
and norepinephrine.
They all stimulate sympathetic nervous system receptors
in the heart.
And they exert the same effects
that the sympathetic nervous system normally does
under physiologic conditions.
And then finally, the drug digoxin
which I talk about in some of the other cardiology modules
inhibits the sodium-potassium ATPase pump.
This leads to an increased calcium level inside of myocytes.
And this is another non physiologic way
to increase contractility.
The main way that contractility is decreased
is by dialing back the sympathetic nervous system.
This can occur naturally when patients enter states
where there's less sympathetic activity.
It can also occur via the use of drugs.
So the main mechanism of sympathetic nervous system
blocking drugs like beta blockers on the heart
is to decrease contractility and also heart rate,
which we'll talk about in a minute.
Some calcium channel blockers, especially verapamil
and diltiazem also affect contractility.
They lead to less calcium being pulled into myocytes
and therefore there's less calcium available
for muscle contraction and decrease contractility.
And then finally, heart failure
especially systolic heart failure
is a disease of myocytes
that results in decreased contractility.
That's the defining characteristic of the disease.
Our fourth determinant of cardiac output
and the work of the heart is the heart rate.
When the heart rate goes up
this increases the cardiac output
under physiologic conditions.
And the main regulators of heart rate.
The factors that cause it to increase or decrease
are the same ones that affect contractility.
In general heart rate and contractility go together.
They're both mainly regulated
by the sympathetic nervous system.
And they are both also affected by sympathomimetic drugs
and blocked by drugs like beta blockers.
There is a confusing concept about heart rate
and stroke volume
that's shown in many cardiac physiology textbooks.
And I'll explain this to you in the next few slides
in a way that hopefully makes sense.
So in the laboratory settings, when you insert pacemakers
into the hearts of animals like dogs
and you artificially increase their heart rate
you see a fall in stroke volume.
This is because there's less time
for filling of the left ventricle.
So the relationship between heart rate
and stroke volume experimentally
is like what I've shown on the screen.
Now this is very counterintuitive.
Most of us think of our output
of our heart going up when our heart rate rises
and this slide indicates the opposite, but keep in mind
this is under artificial settings
in the laboratory when you're increasing the heart rate
without also raising the contractility.
Even in artificial settings like the laboratory
where you're pacing the heart of a dog
an increase in heart rate
over physiologic ranges of heart rates
still leads to a rise in cardiac output.
That's because even though the stroke volume falls
when the heart rate goes up,
like I showed you in the last slide,
the heart rate rises to a greater degree.
And remember cardiac output is equal
to the product of stroke volume times heart rate.
Thus, if you have a small drop in stroke volume
but a greater rise in heart rate
then that effect will be to increase cardiac output.
So thus even in the laboratory
when you're studying animals and you're pacing their heart
as you increase their heart rate,
you still see a rise in cardiac output,
even though the stroke volume is going down
as you raise the heart rate.
And that's a confusing concept
to make sure you understand that.
All of those relationships I just showed you
however are artificial
because under physiologic circumstances
the sympathetic nervous system controls heart rate
and contractility and it never raises the heart rate alone
without also raising the contractility.
What this means is when the sympathetic nervous system
raises the heart rate, the stroke volume goes up
even though there's less time per filling.
There's more contractility such that overall there is a rise
in the stroke volume under physiologic conditions
when the sympathetic nervous system raises the heart rate.
The one clinical situation where a rise in heart rate
can lead to a fall in cardiac output
is under pathologic conditions
in the setting of some cardiac arrhythmias.
There are some cardiac arrhythmias
where the heart rate can get very, very high
sometimes as high as 300 beats per minute.
In this setting, there isn't enough time
for the left ventricle to fill.
And thus the stroke volume falls
and the cardiac output falls.
In other words, at these very high heart rates
even though the heart rate is increased
the stroke volume has dropped dramatically.
Thus, the product of stroke volume times heart rate
begins to fall.
That means the cardiac output gets low.
What this means is that some patients
with cardiac arrhythmias can develop hypotension and shock.
And this usually happens when the arrhythmia results
in a very rapid heart rate.
What this means is the true relationship
between cardiac output and heart rate
is like what I've shown on the screen here.
Under the physiologic range of heart rates
when the sympathetic nervous system
drives an increase in the heart rate,
there is an increase in cardiac output.
This is because the sympathetic nervous system
is increasing contractility in addition to heart rate.
And thus the cardiac output is going up.
However, if the heart rate gets very, very high
for example, in this setting of arrhythmia,
you can reach a point where the cardiac output
begins to fall.
And that's because of the dramatic drop in stroke volume
seen when the heart rate gets very, very high.
So to summarize the work of the heart
is determined by four key components.
The first is the preload, which we often estimate
by the left ventricular end-diastolic volume or pressure.
The second is the afterload, which is often estimated
by the mean arterial blood pressure.
The third variable is the contractility
which is often estimated by the ejection fraction.
And the fourth is the heart rate.
And this will be important when we talk about disease states
because hearts that are starved for oxygen
need to have these factors modified
so that there's reduced oxygen demand.
In addition, hearts that are generating a low cardiac output
need to have these factors modified
so that they increase the work of the heart
and increase the cardiac output.
And that concludes our module on cardiac physiology.