File: 01 EKG Basics
---

Hello everyone
and welcome to our module on EKG Basics.
The EKG is a visual representation
of electrical activity as it moves through the heart.
So in order to understand EKGs,
we need to review how electricity moves
through the heart under normal conditions.
So normally the SA node located
on the right atrial free wall is the pacemaker of the heart.
And it depolarizes and sends a wave
of depolarization spreading two myocytes in the left atrium
and the right atrium.
From there, deportation funnels
through the AAV node and then goes to the HIS-Bundle
and then the left and right bundle branches.
And finally it reaches the pre purkinje fibers
which are embedded in the myocytes
of the left ventricle and right ventricle.
And when the purkinje fibers depolarize
they lead to ventricular depolarization.
Shown on the screen
is a typical example of electrical activity
as it moves through the heart
as depicted by the EKG, the EKG picks
up electrical activity and plots at versus time.
So time is always the X axis
and the Y axis is electrical activity.
And anytime there's an electrical event in the heart,
it can generate either a positive
or negative deflection of the EKG.
A positive deflection is upward.
A negative deflection is downward.
So each of the waves represent
some electrical event in the heart.
So let's go through what each of them represent right now.
The P wave is the first event in the cardiac cycle
and that represents atrial depolarization.
The P wave is followed
by this flat section of the EKG tracing.
And that section is caused because it takes time
for electricity to move through the AV node
HIS-Bundle, bundle branches, and purkinje fibers.
Once electricity moves through all of these structures,
it reaches the ventricles.
And when the ventricles depolarize,
they generate the largest section on the EKG
that's called the QRS complex
and it represents ventricular depolarization.
This complex can include
a negative deflection called a Q Wave,
a positive deflection called an R wave
and another negative deflection called an S wave.
Following the QRS complex
there is something called the T wave
which represents repolarization of the ventricle.
You do not see a wave showing repolarization
of the atria, that's because atrial repolarization occurs
at the same time as the QRS complex, and therefore
atrial repolarization is embedded within the QRS complex.
So here's a normal 12 lead EKG
and it's called a 12 lead EKG
because there are 12 different recordings
of the electrical activity of the heart.
The leads each have a name, leads I, II,
and III are always shown on the left side of the tracing.
Next comes aVr, AVL and AVF.
This is followed by the V leads, V1, two,
and three and V4, five and V6.
Along the bottom of the EKG,
there are often one or more so-called rhythm strips here.
V1 is shown as a rhythm strip
and lead II as a rhythm strip.
On these rhythm strips, multiple QRS complexes are recorded
in a row so that you can better determine the heart rhythm.
And I've expanded lead II at the top
of the screen so that you can see
that each lead has a P wave, a QRS complex, and a T wave
just like we talked about on the last slide.
So most students understand the P waves
and the QRS complexes and what they represent,
but what's often tricky to understand is what each
of the different leads on the surface EKG represent.
Notice that the QRS complex
in lead II is all pointing upward.
Notice that the QRS complex
in lead aVr is all pointing downward.
Notice that in lead V3,
the QRS complex is pointing slightly upward
and slightly downward.
We have to explain this.
All of these leads are recording depolarization
of the same left ventricle.
So why does lead II show the QRS complex
as upward, lead aVr as downward
and lead V3 as partly upward and partly downward?
That's the second key point
about EKG that we have to explain
and that's what we're gonna talk about next.
So let's go back to this drawing
of electrical activity as it moves through the heart.
And let's imagine that the left
and right ventricles are depolarizing.
When that happens,
we have electrical activity moving
in lots of different directions.
Some is moving this way to depolarize the left ventricle,
some is going this way to depolarize the right ventricle.
But if we could sum up all those electrical forces,
we would get a summation vector that looks like this.
Each of the 12 different EKG leads is going to look
at this summation vector from a different vantage point.
And therefore each
of the 12 leads is going to show the QRS complex
which represents ventricular depolarization
as a different shape, because it's looking
at the same summation vector of forces
from a different vantage point.
To make this easier to understand,
let's imagine we have a car moving down the street
being watched by person one and person two.
Person one will say that the car
is moving away from them.
Person two will say that the car is moving towards them.
They're both correct.
They're both watching the same phenomena.
It's just that they are observing it
from a different vantage point.
And that's what each of the 12 leads
on the EKG does, it observes electrical depolarization
of cardiac structures from a different point of view.
Here's another drawing of the heart.
And once again,
I shoot an arrow representing the summation vector
of electricity, as it moves
through cardiac structures.
On this drawing,
I've also shown the vantage point for all of the EKG leads.
So let's see if we can make sense of this now.
So lead aVr views electrical activity
in the heart from the right side of the heart.
This means that all electrical activity from the point
of view of lead aVr is moving away from the lead.
And when electrical activity moves away from a lead,
it generates a negative deflection
on the surface EKG.
Contrast lead aVr with leads I and AVL.
They view electrical activity
from the left side of the heart.
So they will see
that summation vector of forces moving towards them.
And when electrical activity moves towards an EKG lead
it generates an upward deflection on the surface EKG.
Leads II, III, and AVF view electrical activity
from the inferior portion of the heart,
and leads V1 through V6 view electrical activity
across the heart with V1 being more towards the right side
and V6 being more towards the left side.
So now let's look at a normal 12 lead EKG
and see if we can make sense of it.
Here's lead aVr and notice
that the QRS complex is going entirely downward,
that's because lead aVr is positioned on the right side
of the heart and it sees all electrical activity
moving away from it.
Lead V6 on the other hand
is located on the left side of the heart.
It sees all electrical activity moving towards it.
Therefore the QRS complex is entirely upward.
Lead V3 is in the middle.
And so it has some
of the QRS going upward in some going downward.
So all of these leads are looking
at the same electrical phenomenon.
All the QRS complexes represent depolarization
of the same ventricle, but they look different
because each lead Is looking
at this phenomenon from a different point of view.
So here's a summary slide
of the key points that we've just discussed.
These are very important for you to understand
in order to interpret EKGs.
Key point number one is that the different waves
like the P wave and the QRS complex represent repolarization
and depolarization of structures in the heart.
Key point number two is that EKGs have 12 leads
and each lead watches the same thing
but from a different vantage point.
And when the electrical activity moves
towards a lead, that generates an upward deflection,
when it moves away
from a lead, that generates a negative deflection.
Let's briefly discuss cardiac pacemakers.
As I mentioned earlier,
the SA node is the dominant pacemaker
of the heart under normal conditions.
There are however other pacemakers that exist
but they are slower.
And therefore the SA node dominates them
and controls the depolarization rate of the heart.
However, if the SA node fails
one of the other pacemakers can take over.
So as you may know, a normal heart rate is about
60 to a hundred beats per minute.
That's the rate at which the SA node depolarizes.
However, if the SA node were to fail for any reason,
the AV node could begin to depolarize the heart
but it can only do so at a rate
of about 40 to 60 beats per minute.
The HIS-Bundle,
the bundle branches and the purkinje fibers
can also potentially become pacemakers.
However, they are at even slower rates
of about 25 to 40 beats per minute.
You should be aware that conduction velocity
in other words, the speed with which electricity moves
through the heart is a slowest in the AV node.
This is very important physiologically,
by slowing conduction through the AV node,
the heart has more time
for the ventricle to fill with blood.
And this helps make the organ a more effective pump.
Conduction velocity is fastest in the purkinje fibers
and the conduction of electrical activity
through the atrial and ventricular myocytes is
in the middle between these two extremes.
If we go back to this slide,
the reason that the QRS complex does not follow immediately
after the P wave is because it takes time
for electrical activity to move through the AV node,
HIS-Bundle, bundle branches and purkinje fibers.
Most of this time is occupied
by conduction moving through the AV node.
That's because that's where conduction is slowest.
Let's talk about how you can determine heart rate
from the surface EKG.
You can do this by figuring
out how much time passes between two QRS complexes.
Remember each QRS complex represents depolarization
of the left ventricle.
In other words, it represents a heartbeat.
So the time
between QRS complexes varies with the heart rate.
And if you can figure out that time,
you can calculate the heart rate.
So the way this is done is by figuring
out how many boxes pass between two QRS complexes.
And there are two types of boxes.
So-called big boxes are represented by the dark lines.
I'm marking one big box with my pen here.
Between each big box, our five smaller boxes.
So the small boxes represent 40 milliseconds of time.
And the big boxes represent 200 milliseconds of time.
So if you want, you can count
up how many milliseconds pass between two QRS complexes
and do the math and calculate the heart rate.
However, no one really does it that way.
The way it's done is by using a quick method
which involves figuring
out how many big boxes pass between two QRS complexes.
So to do this, you need to identify a QRS complex that falls
on a solid line like this one right here,
you then figure out
how many big boxes pass before the next QRS complex.
You can see that one passes two, three,
so about three and a half, just a little
under four big boxes pass before the next QRS complex.
Once you know how many big boxes, you can determine
the heart rate, if there were just one big box
between the QRS complexes, the heart rate would be 300.
If there were two, it would be 150.
If there were three, it would be 100.
Each additional big box represents a heart rate
of 300 divided by the number of big boxes.
So in other words, three to five big boxes
between a QRS complex is a normal heart rate, a heart rate
between 60 and 100.
And that's what we've got here.
We've got about three to four big boxes
which represents a heart rate
of somewhere around 75 or so a normal heart rate.
And this is the simple way that everyone does
to eyeball the heart rate.
You just look at how many big boxes are
between the QRS complexes, divide the number 300
by the number of big boxes
and that will estimate the heart rate for you.
Next we're going to talk about something known as
the QRS Axis,
which is something you can determine from the EKG.
And it's important in certain disease states.
And in order to understand the QRS Axis,
we have to go back
to that summation vector of all the electrical forces
moving through the heart that we talked about earlier.
If the heart is normal and normally positioned in the chest,
then the summation vector
of electrical forces moving through to heart looks
like this arrow I've shown on the screen here.
Those electrical forces move down
and towards the left ventricle,
just like this arrow on the screen.
Now let's suppose we took a grid
and laid it directly over the heart and labeled it
such that zero degrees was to the right positive,
90 degrees was to the bottom plus 180 degrees
was to the left and negative 90 degrees was to the top.
If we did this, a normal QRS vector,
meaning a QRS vector generated by normal depolarization
of the SA node with a heart in the normal orientation
inside the chest would generate an axis that was
between minus 30 and positive 90 degrees.
In other words, it would usually be
in this bottom right hand quadrant here, or else,
it could go a little bit up into the top left-hand quadrant
but it would never go beyond negative 30 degrees.
And this is what's called a normal QRS Axis.
This is where the axis is located
in patients who have normal hearts
depolarizing under normal conditions.
It turns out that there are a number
of conditions that can shift the QRS Axis to the left.
This is called a left axis deviation.
This happens when the QRS Axis is
between minus 30 and minus 90.
There are a number of things that can do this.
Some of them that are worth knowing
include a left bundle branch block.
This can also occur when you have a ventricular rhythm
like ventricular tachycardia.
This is a heart rhythm that is not originating
in the SA node
but instead is coming from the ventricle itself.
There are also some conditions that can cause
a right axis deviation.
This occurs when the QRS Axis is between positive 90
and plus 180, and some of the conditions that can do
this include a right bundle branch block,
right ventricular hypertrophy.
And there are many others.
With that in mind, let's talk about
how you can determine the QRS Axis using the surface ECG.
In order to do this, we're going to look
at specific leads on the ECG and decide
whether the QRS is pointing mostly up like this.
That's a positive deflection or mostly downward
which is a negative deflection.
And we're gonna start by looking at lead I,
lead I when there is a positive
or upward deflection creates a vector
of electricity going in this direction towards zero degrees.
When lead I is negative, it creates a vector going
in this direction away from zero degrees.
The next lead we'll look at is lead AVF.
Lead AVF is an inferior lead, when there is
a positive deflection in lead AVF.
That is a vector
of electricity going downwards towards 90 degrees.
And when there's a negative deflection in lead AVF,
that is a vector going away from 90 degrees.
So we can take these two vectors, the vector for lead AVF
and the vector for lead I and sum them together.
And we might get a vector, something like this
and that is the QRS Axis, and I've cleared away my inks.
So I can show you
that a normal QRS Axis would have a summation
vector somewhere between negative 30 and plus 90.
And because of normal axis includes this area here
from zero to minus 30 many people,
instead of using lead AVF
use lead to lead II, instead of going
from plus 90 to minus 90
is actually out here at plus 60 degrees.
And so if you use lead V2 together with lead V1
then any time both of those leads are positive
you will have an axis somewhere in here, which is normal.
So that's what many people do.
If you've got a positive QRS vector in lead I,
that means you've got a line going in this direction.
And if you have a positive QRS vector in lead II,
that means you have a line going in this direction.
And therefore their summation is going to be somewhere
in this range here, which is normal.
Now in reality
nobody ever calculates an exact number for the QRS Axis.
Instead, most of us use a quick method to determine
whether the axis is normal, leftward deviated,
or rightward deviated.
So let me go over that quick method now.
To use the quick method you first glance
at lead aVr, lead aVr should always be negative.
If lead aVr is upright
it usually means the limb leads are reversed.
In other words, it means someone has put the leads
on the patient incorrectly.
So to use the quick method in actual practice
you start by glancing
at aVr to make sure the leads are properly positioned.
And if they are, aVr will be negative
as shown in this picture on the screen.
Once you determine that the leads are placed appropriately,
you then look at just two leads
in the 12 EKG, leads one and two, if they're both positive
like I've shown on the screen here,
then the axis is between zero
to 90 and the axis is normal.
And most of the EKGs you'll look at, have a normal axis.
So this is a quick way rapidly determine
that the axis is normal
and that you don't need to go any further looking
for whether it's a left or right deviation.
If they're not both positive
then you have a left or right axis deviation
and you need to figure out which one you have.
For a left axis deviation, all you need to do is look
at lead II, if lead II is negative,
it means the axis is between minus 30 and minus 90
and therefore you have a left axis deviation.
The one exception to this is sometimes lead II will look
like I've shown here where it's partly upward
and partly downward.
This is called a physiologic left axis, which is slightly
to the left, but still within normal limits.
To determine whether you have a right axis deviation
all you need is lead I.
If the QRS complex is negative in lead I
like I've shown here, then you have a right axis deviation
which is between 90 and 180 degrees.
So here's a summary of the quick method
which is what most cardiologists I know use
in actual practice.
You look at aVr quickly to make sure it's negative
which tells you the leads have been placed properly.
You then look at lead I and II
if they're both positive, the axis is normal.
If lead II is negative, you have left axis deviation.
And if lead I is negative,
you have right axis deviation.
And I've shown you the shapes
of all of these on the screen here
so you can remember them.
I'll finish this module by going
through the different time intervals in the surface EKG.
And I'll start with the PR interval.
This is the time from the start
of the P wave to the start of the QRS complex
and a normal PR interval is 120 milliseconds
to 200 milliseconds in duration.
And it's very easy to identify PR prolongation
with your eye. That's because remember what I told you
before, a big box represents 200 milliseconds in time.
So if the PR interval is longer than one big box
in duration, thEn the PR interval is prolonged,
and you can develop a prolonged PR interval
from first degree AV block.
And I talk about this
and other forms of AV block in a separate video.
You can also develop a short PR interval
if you have a bypass track caused
by the Wolf Parkinson white syndrome.
And I'll talk about WPW in its own video as well.
Next is the QRS interval.
This is the time from the start
of the QRS complex to the end of the QRS complex.
And the normal QRS interval is less
than 120 milliseconds in duration.
And I told you before that a small box
in the surface EKG represents 40 milliseconds.
This means that a normal QRS complex should be less
than three small boxes in duration.
And if we look at this blown up image on the top right side
of the screen, you can see that the QRS complex starts
and ends before three small boxes have passed.
Therefore, this is a normal QRS complex.
And there are a number of causes of a prolonged QRS complex
but some of the most common are bundle branch blocks.
You develop a QRS interval prolongation
in a right bundle or left bundle branch block.
And in the video on AV and bundle branch blocks,
I talk in detail
about how to recognize right and left bundle branch blocks.
Next is the Qt interval.
This is the time from the start
of the QRS complex to the end of the T wave.
The Qt interval varies with your heart rate.
So in order to determine whether a Qt interval is normal
you need to determine the heart rate
and then correct the Qt interval.
This is not something I recommend you worry about doing
as a medical student, a rule of thumb you can use, however,
is that the T wave should end
before you are halfway between two QRS complexes.
So if we take the space
between these two QRS complexes and mark the halfway point,
you can see that the T wave
in this example has finished before the halfway point.
And that's what you see
in a patient who has a normal Qt interval.
There are relatively few causes of a short Qt interval
but one that you should definitely know is hypercalcemia.
On the CCG on the left side of the screen
you can see that the T wave begins almost immediately
after the QRS complex.
There is no flat portion
of the EKG between the QRS and the T wave.
And this is what you can see
in patients who have an elevated calcium level.
There are a number of causes of a prolonged Qt interval.
These include hypocalcemia.
That's easy to remember.
It's the opposite of the cause of a short Qt syndrome.
Also a number of drugs
especially anti-arrhythmics and also the long Qt syndrome
which we'll talk about in a second.
To understand why calcium affects the Qt interval,
let's review the role of calcium
in the myocyte action potential.
Calcium is responsible
for phase two of the myocyte action potential.
This is called the plateau phase.
And in this phase, calcium is moving into myocytes.
In the setting of hypercalcemia,
there's less driving force to move calcium into myocytes.
So it takes longer for calcium to fill the cell.
And this phase is going to continue until enough
calcium has gotten inside of the myocytes,
therefore in the setting of hypocalcemia, this plateau phase
phase two is drawn out and it takes longer
for myocytes to depolarize and repolarize.
And that means that it will take longer
for the Qt interval to occur because that phase
of the EKG represents the time required
for myocytes in the ventricles to depolarize and repolarize.
There is a special form
of ventricular tachycardia called Torsade de Pointes.
This word means twisting of the points.
And it's a form of ventricular arrhythmia that occurs
with the QRS complexes getting smaller
and then larger and then smaller again.
And this is the feared outcome of Qt prolongation.
If your Qt interval becomes prolonged,
you will develop Torsade de Pointes
which results in cardiac arrest and can result in death.
And this is why anti-arrhythmic drugs
which prolong the Qt interval are dangerous because
if they prolong it too much, this arrhythmia will develop.
And that's how patients can die
from taking anti-arrhythmic drugs.
You can also get torsade de pointes
from hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia.
This is not related to Qt prolongation.
This is related to effects
of these electrolyte abnormalities
on ventricular depolarization.
Rarely you can get
torsade de pointes from hypocalcemia.
It's interesting hypocalcemia prolongs your Qt interval.
However, it's uncommon
for hypocalcemia to lead to torsade de pointes.
I told you that one of the causes of a prolonged Qt interval
was something called the long Qt syndrome.
There is a congenital disorder called
the congenital long Qt syndrome that is caused
by abnormal potassium and sodium channels in the heart.
This is a very rare disorder
but the reason they may ask you about it
on the USMLE step one exam
is because it's a way to test your underlying knowledge
of the basic myocyte action potential.
Shown in blue on the screen
is a normal cardiac myocyte action potential.
Shown in red is what the action potential can look
like when either the sodium channels
or the potassium channels are abnormal.
Sodium channels are responsible
for this phase of the action potential,
potassium channels are responsible for this phase.
If either the sodium or potassium channels are abnormal,
the myocyte action potential can get drawn out.
As I've shown in this red example on the screen,
when it takes longer
for myocytes to depolarize and repolarize,
that results in a prolonged Qt interval on the surface EKG.
And that's what happens to children born
with the congenital long Qt syndrome caused
by abnormal potassium or sodium channels.
The way this may be presented in a board question is
as a patient with a family history of sudden death.
The reason there is a family history of sudden death is
because the congenital long Qt syndrome runs
in the family and other family members have died
of torsade de pointes caused by a prolonged Qt interval.
A classic scenario is a young patient who has
recurrent seizures.
The patient is not really having seizures.
They're actually passing out from torsade de pointes
and the EKG will show a long Qt interval.
There is also a variant
of the congenital long Qt syndrome that has been
well-described called the Jervell and Lang-Nielsen Syndrome.
This occurs in Norway and Sweden.
It results in the long Qt syndrome
in association with congenital deafness.
It's very rare, but they sometimes ask you
about this in board exams.
Much more common than the congenital long Qt syndrome
is the acquired long Qt syndrome.
This is where a patient has a normal Qt interval
on their EKG, but acquires a prolonged Qt interval
because of a drug they're taking.
This is commonly caused by a number of anti-arrhythmic drugs
which I discussed in another video.
It's also commonly caused by levofloxacin
which is a fluocinolone, an antibiotic.
It can also be caused by haldol, which is an anti-psychotic
and it can be caused by many other drugs.
And importantly, for families
and family members who have the congenital long Qt syndrome
they need to avoid all these drugs.
If their Qt is prolonged at baseline
from the long Qt syndrome, and then they take one
of these drugs, it can be potentially fatal.
Let me mention peaked T waves.
These are T waves that are unusually tall
like these I've shown on the screen here.
This is classically seen in hyperkalemia.
It can also occur very early on when patients
develop ischemia.
These are called hyperacute T waves
and they often pre-seed ST Segment elevation
in acute ischemia.
Lastly, I'll mention U waves.
This is a deflection that comes
after the T-wave hence the name U wave.
It's usually an upward deflection, just like the T-wave.
The origin of U waves is not clear.
One of the prevailing theories
is that it might represent
repolarization of the purkinje fibers
although there are other theories.
U waves can be seen
on a normal EKG, but the classic situation
in which prominent U waves are seen
is in the setting of hypokalemia.
And that concludes our module on EKG Basics.