File: 02 High Yield EKGs
---

Hello everyone and welcome
to our module on High Yield EKGs.
It can be very difficult to learn EKGs
as a medical student.
And one of the reasons is because
there are so many potential findings.
What are shown on the screen are nine EKGs
that I think medical students should be familiar with.
These are the type of EKGs that may come up
on the step one exam.
They're also the type that you may be shown
as a third year student on rotations.
And you ought to be able to recognize.
Now some of these I talk about in other videos for example
we have a video on Atrial Fibrillation and Flutter.
There's a video on Ischemia and one on bundle branch blocks.
So some of these things we'll touch upon in this video here
but not go into detail like I do in the other videos.
But mostly what I'm going to do with this video
is try to give you my approach for how to read EKGs.
And this is especially helpful on your rotations
when you're showing an EKGs and asked to interpret it.
When you're shown an ECG and you're trying to interpret it.
The first thing I recommend you do is try to
identify the P waves and ask yourself the question.
Are there P waves present in this ECG?
If you see P waves present like shown here on the ECG
that's the first step to making an interpretation
of all the major findings on the tracing.
When you see P waves present on an ECG
most likely you're looking at sinus rhythm.
And sinus P waves originate from the Sinus node obviously.
And because they originate from this location
in the right atrium they will generate
P waves that are upright in the inferior leads two,
three and F.
So that's what's shown in this picture on the screen here.
This is a patient with normal sinus rhythm
and there are P waves present and they are upright.
In other words, pointing in this direction in leads two,
three and AVF.
Once you decide whether or not you think
there are P waves on ECG the next thing you want to do
is decide whether the heart rhythm is regular or irregular.
And by this I mean whether the distance between
QRS complexes the RR interval is regular or irregular.
So at the top of the screen is a tracing
from a patient with sinus rhythm.
And you can see that the space
between the QRS complexes is constant
over the entire length of the tracing.
At the bottom of the screen is an irregular rhythm.
This is a patient with Atrial Fibrillation and you can see
that we have some QRS complexes that are far apart
like these two here, others that are very close together
like these two here and then even others that
are somewhere in the middle.
So this is an irregularly irregular rhythm.
The QRS complexes are not occurring at regular intervals.
And that is the second step towards
making a diagnosis of what you're looking at at an ECG.
At the medical student level it's very hard
to remember all the different types of ECG rhythms,
but a simple way to approach ECG is that you're shown
is that if there are P waves present
and the rhythm is regular,
you're most likely looking at sinus rhythm.
This is a very common rhythm
and you should be able to recognize it.
And once you see P waves in a regular rhythm
that is probably what you were looking at.
There are other rare rhythms that can generate P waves
and be regular things like atrial tachycardia
and atrial rhythms.
But these are uncommon.
Most likely a regular rhythm with P waves is sinus rhythm.
If you see an absence of P waves and the rhythm is irregular
then most likely you're looking at Atrial fibrillation.
This is a very common rhythm and Atrial fibrillation
along with Sinus rhythm are two of the rhythms
you ought to be able to identify.
Atrial fibrillation generates an
irregularly irregular rhythm with no P waves present.
Now, there are other things that cause no P waves
and an irregular rhythm.
These are things like Atrial flutter with variable block
but this is much less common in a fib.
Mostly if you see no P waves and irregular rhythm
you're probably looking at Atrial fibrillation.
And then just to round out the possibilities
for steps one and two of my approach to reading ECG
if you see P waves present,
but the rhythm is irregular then you may be looking
at one of these things I've listed here.
So sinus rhythm with PACs may cause an irregular rhythm.
I'll show you a picture of that later in this video.
There's an uncommon rhythm Called
Multifocal atrial tachycardia.
This rhythm comes from the Atria not the sinus node.
It will have P waves but the rhythm will be irregular.
And then finally, sinus rhythm with various forms
of AV block can have an irregular rhythm.
And I talk about this in another video.
If you see no P waves and the rhythm is regular,
then it can be some of these things I've written
on the slide here.
There may be hidden P waves which can be retrograde P waves.
These are seen in Supraventricular tachycardias
and Ventricular tachycardias.
These are relatively uncommon,
but these are the possibilities when you see
an absence of P waves in a regular rhythm.
So step one when you look at an EKGs is to decide
whether the P waves are present.
Step two is to decide whether or not you think
the rhythm is regular.
Step three is to then decide whether or not
the QRS complex is wide or narrow.
A normal or Narrow QRS complex is less
than 120 milliseconds on the ECG or three small boxes.
When you see a normal QRS complex,
it means that the heart is using the
His-Purkinje system normally
and that there are no bundle branch blocks present.
The only way you get a narrow QRS is
if conduction goes through the AV node
through the bundle branches and through
the Purkinje fibers normally.
If you see a wide QRS resin then most likely
you're looking at a bundle branch block
especially if it's an ECG in a stable patient.
The other possibility for a wide QRS complex is
that at some type of Ventricular rhythm
like Ventricular tachycardia.
This will usually be in a patient who is very sick.
In another video.
I talk about bundle branch blocks
but just to quickly review here
this is a normal QRS complex at the top of the screen here.
Even without measuring the number of boxes for the width
of the QRS complex you can see that it's very narrow
from start to finish.
And a right bundle branch block
the QRS complex becomes wide and
hopefully you can appreciate that this is
a much wider QRS complex compared to the top.
And similarly, in a left bundle branch block
the QRS also widens as shown here in this image.
Moving on the next step in interpretation
of an ECG by my method is to check the intervals.
So first check the PR interval.
Normal PR interval is less than 210 milliseconds.
Five small boxes is 200 milliseconds
or one big box is 200 milliseconds.
So basically the PR interval should be about
five small boxes or one big box
in length or shorter than that.
If it's a prolonged PR interval
you may be looking at some form of AV block.
I talk about in another video
the PR interval also prolongs in the setting
of high vagal tone or certain drugs
that slow conduction in AV node.
And the PR interval can shorten in this
setting of high sympathetic tone.
After the PR interval you want to look at the QT interval.
A normal QT interval is less than half of the RR interval.
That's the rule of thumb you can use for measuring this.
And I talk about this in more detail
in the video on ECG basics.
The QT interval becomes prolonged with hypocalcemia.
These patients will have tetany and numbness and spasms.
The QT interval also becomes prolonged
by antiarrhythmic drugs.
And then the QT interval can be very short
in patients with hypercalcemia.
These patients usually have confusion and constipation.
They can also be volume depleted.
And then the final step in my method for analyzing ECG is
is to look at the ST segments.
You want to look for things that may represent ischemia.
So for example,
T waves can be inverted in ischemia as shown
in this picture here.
And I talk about this in the video on ischemic basics.
There are also other T wave abnormalities T waves
can be peaked in early ischemia.
And in hyperkalemia there can also be flat T waves
with U waves present and Hypokalemia.
And then finally ST Depression and ST Elevation
are both signs of ischemia.
There's some ST depression in the CCG on the screen here.
This is the beginning of the ST segment.
This is where it ends.
And you can see that it's depressed.
The bottom of the screen is an example of ST elevation.
These are both signs of ischemia that I discuss
in more detail in the ischemia basics video.
So now let's try to use this method to analyze
a couple of ECG.
So I want you to imagine that you're handed this ECG
on rounds and your attending asks you to interpret it.
How are you going to do that?
Well, let's talk about the steps
and go through them one at a time.
So the first step is to decide
whether or not there are P waves present.
And if you look at the rhythm strip at the bottom
for lead two,
it's very easy to identify the P waves.
They're all over the place here in lead two.
You can also find them easily in lead V6 and V5.
In some leads they're harder to see.
For example, they're harder to see in V2
but if they're present in all the other leads
then you can know that there are P waves present.
So this ECG has P waves present.
Step two is to decide whether the rhythm
is regular and you can see that the distance
between QRS complexes is constant or regular.
Step three is then to decide whether or not
the QRS complex is wide or narrow.
And hopefully you can recognize
that this is a very narrow QRS complex
of about two small boxes.
So we do not have a bundle branch block present
or any type of cause of a widened QRS complex.
So what we're looking at overall here is a rhythm
that is regular with P waves present
with a normal QRS complex and that's most likely going to
be normal sinus rhythm.
That's what this ECG shows.
Now we want to be complete and not miss anything.
So let's move on to step four and check the intervals.
The PR interval starts about here and ends about here.
It's less than one big box in length and that is normal.
So we have a normal PR interval.
And then the QT interval begins at one of the QRS complexes
and ends at the end of the T wave.
And you can see that the QT interval here is less
than half the RR interval.
So we do not have a prolonged QT interval.
And then finally, we want to look at the T waves.
The T waves here are Upright.
They are not elevated or depressed.
So we have no evidence of ischemia.
So this is basically a normal ECG
and you're often shown these
on rounds and asked to interpret them.
So you should be able to recognize normal sinus rhythm.
Now let's go through the method again using this ECG.
So step one is to decide whether or not
there are P waves present and it's very easy
to see P waves here in lead two.
You can also see them in lead three.
You can also find them in lead V3 and V2.
They're all over the place.
So there are P waves present on this ECG.
Step two is to look at the distance
between the QRS complexes and you can see that it's regular.
There is a constant distance between QRS complexes.
So we're dealing with a regular rhythm
with P waves presence.
So we already know that this is most likely
going to be sinus rhythm.
In addition, you can look and the P waves
are upright in leads two, three and AVF
as you expect for sinus P waves.
So most likely sinus rhythm is present on this ECG.
Step three is then to look at the QRS complexes.
And if you look at lead V1 here
you can see that this is a wide QRS complex.
It's about four boxes in width.
And that means that there is some problem
causing a wide QRS complex.
And like I told you earlier, when you're dealing
with an ECG that shows a wide QRS complex,
most likely you're looking at some type
of bundle branch block.
And in another video,
I talk about how to identify a right bundle branch block.
It's always pointing upward in lead V1.
And that's what you've got here is sinus rhythm
with a right bundle branch block.
Now for completeness sake,
let's go through the rest of the steps
to make sure we're not missing anything.
So if we check the PR interval
it starts here and ends about here.
It's west on one big box in widths.
So we have a normal PR interval.
We can then look at the QT interval
which starts here and ends here.
You can see that it's less than half the distance
between the QRS complex or half the RR interval.
And therefore we have a normal QT interval.
So we do not have prolongation
of the PR interval or the QT interval.
And then finally, we look at the T waves
and the ST Segments.
Now you can see the T waves are inverted here
in lead V1.
And then you may not know this
but that's a normal finding and right bundle branch block.
It does not mean that there is a ischemia
but there are ST and T wave abnormalities on the ECG.
They are all consistent with right bundle branch block
which is not something you're likely to know
at the medical student level.
but you should at least be able to identify
that this ECG shows sinus rhythm
with a right bundle branch block.
Now let's take a look at this tracing and we'll start
with step one and look for P waves.
And it's easy to find P waves here and lead two
down along the bottom of the ECG.
You can also see them up here in lead V1.
I can also find them here in lead V3.
They're all over the place.
So we have P waves present.
Next step is to decide whether the rhythm
is regular or irregular.
And hopefully you can identify that this is a regular
interval with no variation in the RR intervals.
Once we've done that, we look at the QRS complex
and hopefully you can see that this is a wide QRS complex.
It's almost one big box or 200 milliseconds in width.
So this is a very wide QRS complex.
And in this case, we have a wide QRS complex which
as I told you before is most likely a bundle branch block
and in V1 is pointing down.
So in another video I talk about left bundle branch blocks
but they always have a QRS complex that is wide
and pointing downward in V1.
So what we're looking at on this ECG is sinus rhythm
with a left bundle branch block.
Now for completeness let's go through the rest of the steps.
So the PR interval is from here to here.
It is normal in width.
The QT interval begins here and ends here.
That is not prolonged.
So we have a normal QT interval.
And then the last step is to look at the ST segments.
And there are a lot of ST abnormalities here.
The T waves inverted here and leads one and AVL.
There is ST segment elevation here in lead V2.
All of these findings are normal components
of a left bundle branch block.
You don't need to know this at the med student level
but it's very difficult to diagnose ischemia
in the setting of a left bundle branch block
because many of the normal findings that go
with the left bundle are also findings of ischemia.
So this patient actually does not have evidence of ischemia.
This patient just has a left bundle branch block.
You don't need to know that at the med student level
but you should be able to identify that this ECG shows
sinus rhythm with a left bundle branch block.
Now let's go through this ECG here.
So step one is to decide whether or not
there are P waves present.
And hopefully you can see that there are no
P waves on the CCG.
There are some bumps like these up here in lead one
that you might think are P waves but they don't
occur regularly before each QRS complex.
And if you look down here for example lead V5
there really is just this wavy baseline but no P waves.
So there are no P waves present on this ECG.
Step two is to decide Whether or not the
rhythm is regular or irregular.
And hopefully you can recognize
that some of these QRS complexes are close together.
For example, these two here,
others are further apart like these two here
and others are somewhere in the middle,
like these two here.
So what we have is an irregular rhythm
with an absence of P waves.
And like I told you before when you see
that most likely you're looking at Atrial fibrillation
and that's what this ECG shows Atrial fibrillation.
Now we'll just go through a couple
of ECGs that are basically pattern recognition.
So if you look at this ECG here
the baseline has this so-called sawtooth pattern.
And when you see that you should think of Atrial flutter
Atrial flutter has a sawtooth pattern present.
You should see the sawtooth pattern in every single lead.
It shouldn't be present in just one lead.
If that's the case you may be looking at something else.
Note also that the QRS complexes are irregular here.
These two are far apart in these two are close together.
Atrial flutter can generate a regular or irregular rhythm
depending on the conduction from the
atria to the ventricles.
Here's a very abnormal ECG.
This is one that you just basically have to
recognize when you see it.
These QRS complexes are very wide and they are very fast.
They're so close together.
They're occurring at about 300 beats a minute.
And this is what you see in ventricular tachycardia.
Ventricular tachycardia is a wide complex
tachycardia rhythm.
I've zoomed in on one of the leads.
So I can show you these little bumps that you can see here.
You can also see them here and you can see them here.
These are the P waves.
So the ventricle in ventricular tachycardia is depolarizing
at a very rapid rate generating the wide complex waves.
At the same time the SA node is depolarizing
and it occasionally generates a little P wave,
which will be a little bump
that you will see on one of the wide complexes coming
from the ventricular rhythm.
Torsades de pointes is a special form
of ventricular tachycardia where the QRS complex is formed.
This undulating sinusoidal pattern like shown
on the screen here.
This is just pattern recognition.
You just have to have seen this to recognize it.
The way you get this arrhythmia is if you have
a PVC occurred during the QT interval.
So patients with a prolonged QT interval are
at the greatest risk.
There are a number of antiarrhythmic drugs that
prolong the QT interval and they put patients at risk
for torsades.
There is a congenital long QT syndrome in patients
who have this disorder are at risk for torsades.
And then finally some antibiotics occasionally
prolonged QT interval in certain patients
the drugs that classically do this are erythromycin
in the quiniolones.
You can also develop torsades unrelated to the
QT interval in certain electrolyte disorders.
Hypokalemia and Hypomagnesemia are famous
for causing torsades.
And in fact giving magnesium is one of the ways
you can treat this arrhythmia.
What's interesting is
You may know that hypocalcemia can prolong the QT interval
but it turns out that torsades is fairly
rare in hypocalcemia.
The reasons for this are not well understood
but nevertheless hypoglycemia can potentially
cause arrhythmia although the more common
electrolyte disorders are hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia.
A PVC is a premature ventricular contraction.
It is a deep polarization that originates
in the ventricles and causes the myocardium to depolarize
outside of the control of the SA node.
So if you look at this rhythm strip
at the top of the screen,
we've got a sinus P wave followed
by a QRS complex and a T wave.
Another sinus P wave and a QRS complex in a T wave
another one.
And then we have this early wide apparent looking
beat that is a PVC.
This electrical activity originates in the ventricle.
It doesn't use the AV node and the bundle branches.
That's why it doesn't generate a normal looking
QRS complex instead of generates a wide bizarre complex.
And it's a PVC it's premature in that it comes
in earlier than you would expect for the next QRS complex.
The next QRS complex after these first three
should occur somewhere about here.
But instead we get an early complex, that's a PVC.
And at the bottom of the screen
Is another early complex right here
but it has a narrow QRS normal looking QRS complex.
That is a PAC it's an aberrant electrical impulse
that is generated by the atria.
And for that reason it uses the AV node
and the bundle branches.
And it has a normal looking QRS complex
but it's still early and therefore
it's a premature Atrial contraction.
And that concludes our video on high yield EKGs.