01 Atherosclerosis
---

Hello everyone, and welcome to our module on atherosclerosis.

Let's start with a little bit of vocabulary. Arteriosclerosis literally means hardening of the arteries. For centuries, people noticed that when they examined the arteries in cadavers, many times they were very hard and sort of crunchy. You may have seen this yourself in the arteries of your cadaver in the anatomy lab. And in the cardiology section, in the videos on hypertension, I talk about two types of arteriosclerosis that can result from longstanding high blood pressure. Those are hyaline arteriosclerosis and hyperplastic arteriosclerosis.

In this video, we're going to focus, however, on atherosclerosis, which is a form of arteriosclerosis. It's one of the causes of hardening of the arteries, and this is the most common type. This is why most people develop hardening of the arteries as they age. Atherosclerosis means the growth of atheroma and atheroma is our plaques which accumulate on the arterial walls. So if this were a cross-section of an artery, in atherosclerosis, plaque begins to build up and narrow the lumen of that blood vessel, and that's what can lead to disease.

It's a chronic inflammatory process, as we'll talk about in a minute. It involves macrophages especially but also T-cells. It also involves the accumulation of lipoproteins in the wall of the blood vessel, especially LDL. LDL is the so-called bad lipoprotein, and that's because it's associated with atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis is the underlying cause of many, many common diseases. In my field, it causes myocardial infarction and stable angina. It can lead to stroke. It can also lead to peripheral vascular disease.

On this slide is a drawing and also a biopsy of an artery with atherosclerosis. So let's start with the drawing on the left. At the top is a normal artery with no plaque. On the bottom is an artery that has been narrowed because of atherosclerotic plaque. And you can see this plaque buildup along the vessel wall and it is shrinking the lumen for blood flow to much smaller than it otherwise would be. Notice also that when you look at the plaque in cross-section, it predominantly affects one half of the vessel much more than the other, and this is typical. Usually these plaques are said to be eccentric, meaning they do not equally affect all sides of the vessel wall. So you can see the plaque's all built up over here, but there's none on this side of the artery. You can see the same thing when you look at the biopsy slide on the right. So this is what the artery should look like. I'm circling it with my pen, but you can see that there's plaque buildup much more predominantly on this side, but also some on this side and the blood vessel has been narrowed down to this tiny lumen for blood flow.

Before we go any further, let's briefly review the structure of arteries. So arteries are made up of three layers. The intima is the inner most layer. It's a single layer of endothelial cells with a basement membrane. The media is the middle layer. It has smooth muscle cells, and it can also contain elastin, which we'll talk about in a minute. And then finally, the outer layer, or the adventicia, contains connective tissue. It also contains the blood vessels that supply the artery. These vessels are called the vasa vasorum of arteries, and this is also where you can find nerve fibers.

Not all arteries in the body are the same. Some are called elastic and others are called muscular. The elastic arteries get their name because they are relatively stretchy. And that's because they have large amounts of a protein called elastin found in the media layer. This allows the vessels to stretch and expand in systole, when they fill with blood, and then in diastole, when the blood drains away, they can contract and become smaller. And this is the type of artery that's found in the aorta. Your aorta is a major elastic artery. You can also find this in the carotid arteries and the iliacs.

The muscular arteries have layers of smooth muscle cell around them. And these are the types of arteries that will vasoconstrict or vasodilate to modify blood flow. And you may know, that the arterials are the major resistance vessels of the vascular system, and that's because they are the smallest muscular vessels, so they provide the most flow resistance, and therefore, when the arterials constrict or dilate, this has the greatest impact on the resistance to blood flow.

So if you understand all that, then it's easy to understand which vessels are most effected by atherosclerosis. First of all, it affects large elastic arteries. So these are the aorta, the carotid arteries and the iliacs. And this is why many people develop plaque in their aorta. Many people develop carotid artery stenosis which can lead to strokes. And many patients develop iliac stenosis, which can lead to lower extremity vascular disease. The other type of blood vessel that develops atherosclerosis are medium-sized muscular arteries. And the main one here are the coronary arteries, but also the popliteal arteries in the leg. And because these vessels are commonly affected by atherosclerosis, that's why people develop coronary disease.

Nobody knows exactly why atherosclerosis occurs, but there are a couple of underlying pathologic mechanisms that are well-described as contributors to atherosclerosis. And we're gonna go through these now. These are high yield for you to know for your boards.

So the first one is endothelial injury or dysfunction. Exactly how this happens is not completely understood, but it's believed that this is the reason that certain risk factors promote atherosclerosis. So cigarette smoke, high blood pressure, high cholesterol, these are all associated with abnormal function of the endothelial layer. And it's believed that this endothelial dysfunction predisposes to the development of atherosclerosis.

Another reason it is believed that endothelial dysfunction contributes to atherosclerosis is because plaque commonly forms at branch points and the origins of vessels, which are called the ostia of vessels. These are very common sites of plaque formation, and the reason this is believed to be the case is because there is turbulent flow at branch points and the origins of vessels, and turbulent flow has been shown to stress endothelium.

Shown on the screen is a coronary angiogram from one of my patients. This is the left main artery right here and it branches into the LAD and the circumflex artery. This is a branch point. Black dye is filling the vessel. But if you notice here, at the branch between the left main LAD and circumflex, there's a white spot. That means there is no dye in that spot, and that's because there is a blood clot there, a thrombus. This is a very dangerous type of myocardial infarction. Thrombus is filling the branch point that supplies the circumflex and the LAD artery. And this is where unfortunately we commonly see myocardial infarctions in plaque, and that's because it's a branch point, and it also involves the origins of several blood vessels. And this is believed to be tied to underlying endothelial stress that occurs due to turbulent flow.

Another key piece in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis is lipids. LDL cholesterol particles accumulate in the intima layer of arteries, and there, they become oxidized by free radicals. Exactly how this happens is incompletely understood, but it is those oxidized LDL particles that are taken up by macrophages, and they can not be degraded. As a result, macrophages fill up with lipids and become something known as a foam cell, and these foam cells are found in atherosclerotic plaques.

The next piece in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis is chronic inflammation. This is believed to be a chronic inflammatory process. The reason this is believed to occur is because oxidized LDL damages the endothelium and smooth muscle cells in the artery wall. This leads to inflammation. In addition, macrophages release cytokines and that draws in more inflammatory cells. So for all of these reasons, chronic inflammation plays a part in the development of arthrosclerosis.

And the final piece in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis is smooth muscle cell proliferation. Smooth muscle cells are normally found in the media, but they can proliferate and grow into the intima in patients with atherosclerosis. And when this happens, they lay down extracellular matrix, which is one of the components of atherosclerotic plaque. And a key growth factor for driving smooth muscle cell proliferation is PDGF, which is platelet-derived growth factor. Increased activity of PDGF has been well-described in the basic science literature as a stimulus for smooth muscle cell proliferation that leads to atherosclerosis.

People have studied the growth of plaques of atheroma in vessel walls over time, and there are a number of classic phases that you should know about. The first phase in development of atheroma is development of fatty streaks. These are small layers in the vessel wall. They contain macrophages filled with lipids, and they form a line or a streak along the vessel lumen.

If you look at this slide on the screen here, this is a normal vessel on the left side. The fatty streak is shown on the right side, and it really doesn't look like much, except for a little bit of macrophages here in the wall that are filled with lipids. It does not impair blood flow. And you can find these in very, very young patients. It's been seen in children and adolescents. And the thing to know about these is they don't all progress. So anyone who has a serious atherosclerotic plaque once had a fatty streak in that location. However, not everyone that has fatty streaks is going to get plaque in that location later in life.

From the fatty streak phase, growth progresses into the typical atherosclerotic plaque. These plaques have a thickened intimal layer with lipids accumulated in the vessel wall. A drawing of this is shown right here. They usually form in a patchy way along the wall of an artery. They rarely involve the entire wall. And this is why, as I told you before, plaques are usually said to be eccentric, not concentric. And this means that if you look down the lumen of a blood vessel, you're gonna see more plaque on one side of the vessel and less on the other. They rarely form in an even way around the entire blood vessel wall.

And here's a picture just to put it all together. Initially, you have a normal vessel. You develop a fatty streak that progresses into an atherosclerotic or fibrofatty plaque, and eventually these plaques can rupture and ulcerate, and we'll talk more about that a little later. Those are called advanced or vulnerable plaques. Shown on this slide are the top five locations where plaques form. The number one spot is the abdominal aorta. But the thing to know about this blood vessel is it's very large. It's normally about three or four centimeters in size. So it's very hard for plaque to narrow this down to the point where it causes ischemia. You never see ischemia from plaque in the abdominal aorta. What you do see are aneurysms. So the plaque damages the blood vessel wall, and that leads to aneurysm formation. We'll talk about this in a minute, but abdominal aortic aneurysms are very common and that's a consequence of plaque or atherosclerosis in the abdominal aorta.

The second most common location is the coronary arteries. In contrast to the aorta, these are very small, just a few millimeters in width. So it doesn't take much plaque to narrow these vessels, and that's why coronary artery disease is so common. After the coronary arteries, the next three locations are the popliteal arteries, the internal carotid artery, and finally the Circle of Willis.

Now let's talk about some of the consequences of atherosclerotic plaque. The first one is ischemia. If the plaque narrows the vessel lumen so that blood flow is poor, that leads to ischemia in the tissue beyond the atheroma. Second consequence is plaque rupture. So in some cases, these plaques will rupture and that exposes substances within the plaque that are thrombogenic and a clot forms. And this can acutely close down a vessel. In other words, a vessel can go from having a 10 or 20% plaque that's not causing any trouble to being completely occluded within a matter of a few seconds.

And this is how people develop STEMIs. It's also how people develop strokes because the artery can shut down or a piece of the thrombus can break off in the carotid artery, for example, and travel to the brain.

It's also possible to have bleeding or hemorrhage into a plaque. These lesions have very small proliferating vessels. This is called neovascularization of plaque, and they can rupture, but it may be contained within the lesion and therefore the lesion can rapidly expand.

So in my field of cardiology, we sometimes have people who come in for a stress test and pass their stress test. A week later, they develop chest pain and go to the cath lab. And we find that they have a lesion obstructing 90% of their vessel, and they ask why did this happen? And the reason is because between the stress test and the development of chest pain, they hemorrhaged into the lesion. And it grew from something that was very small, maybe only obstructing 10 or 20% of the lesion to something that was very large, maybe obstructing 80 or 90%.

And then the final complication is aneurysms. So these lesions can damage the underlying media and weaken it, and an aneurysm can develop in the wall. And this is why plaque is associated with abdominal aortic aneurysms. As I told you before, the abdominal aorta is a very common spot for plaque formation. It's a big vessel. So plaque doesn't lead to ischemia, but it often leads to aneurysms.

Because atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory process, it can lead to dystrophic calcification. I talk about dystrophic calcification in the video on pathologic calcification, but it's commonly the result of chronic inflammation and this includes atherosclerosis. So people who have atheromas often develop calcification within the atheroma from chronic inflammation.

And this is the basis of taking CT scans to diagnose coronary artery disease. Shown on the screen is the heart from one of my patients who underwent a coronary CT scan. This is the left atrium right here. This is the left ventricle right here. And you can see this white material that traces the path of the LAD artery. That is evidence of calcification. And so when I see this in the CT scan at one of my patients, I know that they have coronary artery disease. It doesn't tell me how severe the disease is, but you know that it's present. And that's because of the calcification that resulted from chronic inflammation.

I'll finish this video by talking about infarction, which can be a consequence of atherosclerosis, although there are other causes. Infarction means an area of ischemic necrosis. It's tissue areas that have died. The cells have undergone necrosis and the cause of the damage was ischemia.

And it's classically taught that there are two types of infarction, so-called white infarctions and red infarctions. White infarcts are the much more common type. These occur when the arterial supply to a solid organ is shut off. These are very common in the heart when patients have myocardial ischemia. You can also see them when patients have ischemic damage in the kidneys or the spleen.

The reason these organs classically develop white infarcts is because there's a limited ability in these organs for blood to seep into the damaged area from healthy tissue. Therefore, when the blood supply is shut off to one area, no blood goes there and the area becomes white. And that's why when you look at gross pathology of white infarcts, you see a pale area within the tissue.

And this is a picture of a kidney that has suffered a renal infarction, and you can see that there's this white area. That's a white infarct. It's caused by ischemic necrosis. The second type of infarction is called a red infarct or a hemorrhagic infarct.

And this is much less common than the white infarctions. In a red infarct, you still have ischemic necrosis. So cells are dying from ischemia. However, some blood is able to enter the ischemic tissue and give the tissue a red color. And that's why these are red infarcts, not white.

There's a couple of reasons why this can occur. The first example is if the venous drainage from a tissue is blocked, and this classically occurs in testicular torsion. So in torsion, the testicle's blood cannot drain. So the blood backs up, ischemia develops, there's ischemic necrosis, but the testicle is not going to look white. It's going to look red because it's filled with blood.

Second way this can occur is if there's infarction in a tissue with a dual blood supply. So when this happens, blood flows from a second vessel and floods the ischemic area. It's not enough blood flow to overcome the ischemia or to rescue the tissue that is undergoing ischemic necrosis. However, it is enough blood flow to give that area of tissue a red color. And the classic location for this is in the lungs. The lungs have a very diffused blood supply.

So if there's an infarction to an area of the lung, blood will seep in from neighboring areas and give that infarction a red color, very different from the white color we saw when we talked about white infarcts. You can also see this in the small intestine where there's a dual blood supply there as well.

And then the final reason that a red infarct can occur is if flow is re-established to a necrotic area. So if patients have a myocardial infarction, I just told you they should develop a white infarct, but if angioplasty is done and blood flow is restored to that necrotic tissue, it will now take on a red color. It won't look white anymore, and that's because you have restored blood flow.

This is a picture of a lung infarction. And it's very easy to see why it's called a red infarct because it looks red, very different from the pale infarcts we talked about in the kidney and the heart.

And that concludes our video on atherosclerosis.