03 STEMI
---

Hello everyone and welcome to our module on ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction.

STEMI is the term used to refer to an ST-elevation Myocardial Infarction, and this disorder gets its name because on the surface ECG, there are ST-elevations and we'll talk about that in a minute.

The cause of a STEMI is rupture of an atherosclerotic plaque with thrombus formation and complete 100% vessel occlusion. What makes a STEMI a STEMI is that the thrombus allows no blood flow beyond the obstructionist shown in this picture, on the screen here, if there is thrombus formation and there is some blood flow beyond the obstruction that will lead to end STEMI and unstable angina, which I'll talk about in another video.

Because of the vessel occlusion, there is a schema and ischemic chest pain. And as I said before, there will be ST segment elevations on the surface ECG. This is the hallmark of a STEMI. In patients who have a STEMI with complete occlusion of a blood vessel. There will be, what's known as Transmural Ischemia of the left ventricle in the territory supplied by the occluded vessel.

Transmural means that the entire wall is ischemic and this is also different from end STEMI and unstable angina and end STEMI and unstable angina. The ischemia only involves the sub endocardial layer right near the LV cavity, but in the setting of STEMI, you have Transmural Ischemia and the entire wall develops ischemia. This is an angiogram from a patient having a STEMI. There's a catheter in the right coronary artery and dies injected, but it only moves a short distance down the right coronary artery, and then it stops. And the reason it stops is because there's a blood clot, occluding the vessel.

And here's another picture of the same vessel after it's been treated with angioplasty. You can now see the dye completely fills the vessel all the way down to the posterior descending artery. On the surface, ECG leads go together to tell you which territory of the heart is ischemic. When the anterior wall of the left ventricle is ischemic. What you see are ST-elevations in leads V1, V2, V3, and V4, as I've shown on this image.

And here's an ECG from a patient having an anterior wall myocardial infarction, the anterior wall of the left ventricle is ischemic. And for that reason, the anterior leads show ST-elevation. So you can see ST-elevations here in lead V2. They're also easy to see in leads, V3 and V4. These are the anterior leads of the left ventricle.

When the lateral wall of the left ventricle is ischemic. You can see ST-elevations in the so-called lateral leads. Those leads are one and AVL and also V5 and V6. This is an ECG from a patient having a lateral left ventricular myocardial infarction. It's easy to see ST-elevations in leads one and leads AVL here. There are also some ST-elevations in leads, V five and V6, although they're very subtle and not as easy to see, but you should easily be able to identify the ST-elevations in one and AVL here.

And then finally, the inferior wall of the left ventricle. When that develops a schema, you see ST-elevations in leads two, three, and AVF. These are called the inferior leads of the heart, and here's a patient with an inferior myocardial infarction. There are ST-elevations that you can see in leads two, three, and AVF, all consistent with inferior left ventricular myocardial ischemia.

By knowing which territory of the left ventricle is ischemic from the ECG. You can figure out which artery is occluded in a STEMI. So when you see anterior ST-elevations in V1 through V4, the anterior wall of the left ventricle is supplied by the left anterior descending artery. So this is the artery that will have a thrombus. When you see lateral ST-elevations in one L, V5 and V6, this portion of the left ventricle is supplied by the left circumflex artery. So that is the artery that has the thrombus. When you see inferior ST-elevations in leads two, three, and F this implies ischemia of the posterior descending artery. That's what supplies the inferior wall.

Now, usually the blood cause is not actually in the PDA instead it's in the artery that supplies the PDA. So in patients who are right dominant, which is about 90% of patients, the PDA is supplied by the right corner artery. So most commonly inferior ST-elevations imply occlusion of the right coronary artery. About 10% of patients are left dominant and these patients have an occlusion of the left circumflex.

When they develop inferior ST-elevations. There are some special complications that can occur in Inferior MIs you should be aware of. And the first one is right ventricular infarction. So when we say that the anterior wall or the inferior wall is ischemic, we're talking about the left ventricle, but in some inferior myocardial infarctions, the right ventricle can develop ischemia, the right ventricles blood supplies from the right coronary artery. And remember what I told you most inferior MIs involve ischemia of the right coronary artery.

So a portion of those also lead to ischemia of the right ventricle. When the right ventricle becomes ischemic, it loses its contractility, and this will raise pressure in the right atrium and lead to elevated jugular venous pressure. In addition, one of the main jobs of the right ventricle is to pump blood to the left heart as preload, so when the right ventricle becomes ischemic, there is decreased preload to the left ventricle and this can lead to hypotension. So the two hallmarks of a right ventricular infarction occurring as a complication of an inferior STEMI are elevated jugular venous pressure and hypotension, very high yield remember that, and you can make the diagnosis of a right ventricular infarction by doing special ECG leads called right-sided chest leads.

This is a picture showing you where the normal ECG leads go. V1 is just to the right of the sternum. And then V2 through V6 are all on the left side of the sternum here. If you wanna make a diagnosis of a right ventricular infarction, you place right-sided leads that go around this way on the patient, and you will see ST-elevations there. And that tells you that there's infarction of the right ventricle.

The other special complication that occurs in many inferior myocardial infarctions is sinus bradycardia and heart block. This is because the vagus nerve runs near the inferior wall, and it can become stimulated in a setting of inferior schema. So many patients with inferior ischemia and ST-elevations in two, three, and AVF will have sinus bradycardia, or even sometimes heart block. This is a patient here with heart block shown in the screen. I'll talk about this in detail in another video, but you can see this in inferior MIs, and it's all from vagal nerve activation.

Usually in STEMI, what you see are occlusions of the lad left circumflex or right coronary arteries, but sometimes other coronary vessels can develop occlusions. For example, some patients develop a left main STEMI from a left main occlusion. This is a very dangerous scenario because the left main branches into the lad and circumflex. So these patients have ischemia over a massive portion of their ventricle. The hallmark on ECG of a left main occlusion is ST-elevation in lead AVR. This is sometimes called the forgotten lead cause people forget to look at it, but you can see in this ECG on the screen from a patient with a left main STEMI that there's ST-elevation and lead AVR.

Everywhere else on the ECG, all you see are ST depressions. They're ST depressions in lead one. You can see them easily in leads two and F you can also see them here in V3, V4, V five and V6. So if you forget to look at lead AVR, what you will think you have is diffuse ST depressions and you might think that this is not a STEMI, but you have to remember to look at lead AVR ST-elevation and lead AVR suggests a left main occlusion.

The other special type of STEMI is a Posterior Myocardial Infarction. So this is a STEMI that involves just the PDA, not the right coronary or the circumflex, but an isolated STEMI to the posterior descending artery. What this will show on the surface ECG is an absence of ST-elevations. All you will see are ST depressions in leads V1, V2, and V3. And you can be tricked into thinking that this is not a STEMI in order to diagnose a posterior myocardial infarction. You have to play so-called posterior leads. These are special leads on the back of the patient, and they are the leads that will show ST-elevation in a posterior MI.

If we go back to this drawing to diagnose a posterior MI, you have to place leads that go around the back of the patient. These are leads like V seven V eight and V nine. They go around the back and those leads will show ST-elevation, and a posterior MI you won't see it in a normal leads like V1 through V6. And so here's a summary slide of the two special subtypes of STEMI and a left main STEMI. You see ST-elevation in lead AVR with diffuse ST depressions, everywhere else in a posterior myocardial infarction. You see anterior ST depressions with the standard leads, but you will see ST-elevation if you place posterior leads like V7 through V9.

When treating a patient with a STEMI, we say that time is muscle. And we say this because the coronary artery is occluded by a thrombus and the longer it remains occluded, the more muscle that dies and in clinical trials, the longer patients are delayed in getting that artery open. The more likely they are to die, the more likely they are to develop heart failure. And the more likely they are to be hospitalized in the future. So all of these very important end points for patients are related to how long it takes to open the artery. So this is a medical emergency, and we go to great lengths to very quickly open the occluded artery in patients with STEMI. So the main objective of treatment is to open the artery. This is called revascularization.

Option one is emergency angioplasty. So many hospitals, like the one that I work at, have a team on call, ready to come in at any time for a STEMI to perform mechanical opening of the artery with angioplasty. And the goal is to do this in less than 90 minutes. This is called the door to balloon time. The time from when the patient enters the door to the hospital, and the time that a balloon is inflated in the coronary artery to restore blood flow that's so-called door to balloon time should be less than 90 minutes. This is a quality of care metric hospitals with longer door to balloon times have a higher in-hospital mortality.

The second option to open the vessel is thrombolysis. This is administering a drug like tissue plasminogen activator that licensed the clot. They should be done in less than 30 minutes. This is called the door to needle time. Clinical trials have shown that emergency angioplasty is superior to thrombolysis. So this is the preferred technique. However many hospitals don't have access to teams that can perform emergency angioplasty. So in those parts of the country and those parts of the world, thrombolysis is done.

Some other therapies for STEMI are shown on this slide. Remember time matters. So medical therapy is just supportive. It's given while you're working to open the artery, because this is a thrombotic problem with a thrombus in the coronary artery. Aspirin is given to inhibit platelet aggregation and heparin is administered to inhibit clot formation. This is also an ischemic problem. There's an imbalance in demand and supply of oxygen. So beta blockers are often given to reduce oxygen demand, and the same is true of nitrates, but all of these things are just done while you're working to get Lytics or angioplasty ready to definitively restore blood flow in the artery.

There are a couple of special precautions you have to take when treating STEMI beta blockers are dangerous in some inferior MIs, because remember, like I told you before many inferior MIs involve stimulation of the vagus nerve. So these patients are at risk for bradycardia and AV block, and you can make that worse with beta blockers. Nitrates are also dangerous in cases of RV infarction. Remember what I told you before, when there's RV infarction, you drop the preload to the left ventricle nitrates also dropped a preload. So you can cause life-threatening hypotension, if you give nitrates to patients who have a right ventricular infarction.

Some other STEMI treatments that you will sometimes see used include clopidogrel, which is an ADP receptor blocker that inhibits platelets, eptifibatide is sometimes used. It's a IIB/IIIA receptor blocker that inhibits platelets and bivalirudin is also used which is a direct thrombin inhibitor. And I talk about all these drugs in the hematology section.

So here's a typical hospital course for a patient with STEMI. The patient arrives in the emergency room with chest pain at 5:42 PM. An EKG is done at five 50, and a STEMI is identified. The cardiac cath lab team is activated for emergency angioplasty while the emergency angioplasty is being arranged, medicines are given in the emergency room like aspirin, metoprolol, a nitro drip, and a heparin bolus, and the patient is transported to the cath lab when they're ready. At six 15, the arteries and opened with a balloon at 6:42 PM, such that the door to balloon time is 60 minutes within the goal time period of less than 90 minutes.

If you work at a hospital without emergency angioplasty, this is the typical STEMI course. The patient arrives again in the ER and EKG has done to identify the STEMI. Similar medications are given in the ER, but then instead of emergency angioplasty tissue plasminogen activator, which is a late occasion is given based on the patient's weight. It's administered as an IV push. And the door to needle time is 25 minutes, which is within the goal time period of less than 30 minutes.

And that concludes our video on STEMI.