04 Unstable Angina⁄NSTEMI
---

Hello everyone and welcome to our module on NSTEMI and Unstable Angina.

NSTEMI is the term used to refer to Non-ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarctions. These are myocardial infarctions caused by plaque rupture with thrombus formation but what differentiates an NSTEMI from a STEMI is that in NSTEMI, there is subtotal or less than 100% vessel occlusion. This leads to a scenario like what's shown in the drawing on the screen here. We've got a plaque that's ruptured with formation of a thrombus, but there is blood flow beyond the obstruction so that the myocardium is not completely deprived of oxygen.

This leads to ischemic chest pain, just like in STEMI, but you do not see ST-elevations on the surface ECG. And the reason you do not see ST-elevations is because there is some blood flow beyond the obstruction, because the obstruction is subtotal. The portion of the myocardium that develops ischemia in NSTEMI is the sub endocardium. NSTEMIs are said to lead to sub endocardial ischemia. If you'll get this drawing on the screen here, recall that the coronary vessels are in the epicardium, furthest away from the left and trick or cavity shown here.

Now, the endocardium, which is right along the border of the LV cavity, can get oxygen from the blood inside the ventricle. But the subendocardial, which is the layer of myocardium that is just below the endocardium, has to rely on the coronary vessels for oxygen. And because this portion of the myocardium is furthest away from the coronary vessels, it is the most vulnerable to ischemia. So when you have a subtotal occlusion as in NSTEMI, what happens is this sub endocardium usually develops ischema.

And this is different once again from a STEMI. In a STEMI there's complete loss of blood flow so the entire wall develops ischemia, that's said to be transmural ischemia. You usually do not see transmural ischemia in NSTEMI. Instead you see sub endocardial ischemia. By definition, you do not see ST-elevations on the surface ECG in patients with NSTEMI, but there are some ECG changes you can see, and these are caused by sub-endocardial ischemia.

So for example, you may see ST depressions or T-wave inversions. In NSTEMI these are signs of sub-endocardial ischemia. I talk about these in more detail in the video on ischemia basics, but some of these are shown in the screen here. So this is the baseline of the ST Segment. You can see that the ST segments are depressed. You can also see that these T-waves are upside down or inverted. These are all signs of sub-endocardial ischemia, and they can be seen in NSTEMI.

You suspect the diagnosis of NSTEMI in patients who have ischemic type chest pain and T-wave inversions or ST depressions on the ECG. But another way you can make the diagnosis is by testing for cardiac biomarkers. So these biomarkers are normally found inside of myocytes and they spill into the blood when there's cardiac injury. The most commonly used marker is traponin either troponin I or T. The level of troponin I or T in the blood, will increase two to four hours after an NSTEMI and will remain elevated for several weeks. Sometimes the biomarker CK-MB is also used. This biomarker increases four to six hours after an MI, but it does not stay up for weeks. It goes back to normal within two to three days. CK stands for creatinine kinase.

And there are several types of creatinine kinase found in different cells in the body. In skeletal muscle cells, the most common form is CK-MM. In cardiac cells, the most common form is CK-MB. And in the brain, the most common form is CK-BB. Now it turns out most tissues have some of all three of these forms, but what I've shown on the slide, is that predominant form. And the way this can sometimes be a problem is when people have elevated CK levels, not due to myocardial infarction. So for example, a patient with rhabdomyolysis will have a very high level of CK in the blood, but they're not having a heart attack. They may also have a high level of CK-MB because remember there's some MB found in skeletal muscle cells. It's just not the predominant type.

So in these situations, what you can do is take the ratio of MB to the total CK to diagnose ischemia. So for example, in a patient with a myocardial infarction, most of the total CK will be CK-MB, in a patient with rhabdomyolysis very little of the total CK will be CK-MB. So this ratio is helpful for diagnosing ischemia when you are using creatine kinase has a biomarker. There's also some AST found in cardiac cells. AST is typically used to diagnose liver problems, but sometimes patients will present with abdominal pain as an angina equivalent, and they will have an isolated increase in AST. You should be aware that this could be a myocardial infarction. And this is one of the many reasons that in any patient presenting with abdominal pain and EKG is usually checked because some patients have abdominal pain instead of chest pain as their anginal equivalent.

Let's talk about the treatment of NSTEMI. So this is a thrombotic problem because there's a thrombus in a coronary artery, and it's also an ischemic problem. There is insufficient blood flow to the myocardium so these features are similar to a NSTEMI, but what's different between an NSTEMI and a STEMI, is that there's no ticking clock. And NSTEMI has a subtotal occlusion, but there's still some blood flow to the distal myocardium.

So emergency angioplasty is usually not performed and thrombolysis is not administered. And the reason these things aren't done is because there's still some oxygen going to the myocardium. So although it's an urgent situation, it's not an emergent situation where the clock is ticking and every minute you delay in opening up the artery, the heart gets sicker and sicker. So typical treatment for NSTEMI is to administer an aspirin, which reduces the thrombus burden. Beta blockers are typically administered because these reduced mal cardio oxygen demand. Heparin is usually administered because this reduces the risk of clot formation. And then angioplasty is usually performed, but it's non-emergent. It can wait a few hours or a day or so until the patient is stabilized and ready for an angioplasty.

So here's a typical NSTEMI course, like you might see on your clinical rotations in the hospital. A patient presents to the emergency room with chest pain, the biomarkers are elevated and a diagnosis of NSTEMI is made. Medical therapy has started with aspirin, metoprolol and heparin drip. The patient is admitted to a cardiac floor. The next day, the patient has an angiogram and there's a 90% blockage of the LAD with a thrombus and a stent is placed, and thus the patient has been treated for their NSTEMI.

Now let's talk about Unstable Angina, which is a very similar clinical syndrome to NSTEMI and Unstable Angina just like an NSTEMI, there is plaque rupture with thrombus formation and subtotal vessel occlusion. So there's some blood flow beyond the occlusion to the myocardium. This causes ischemic chest pain. And then what differentiates unstable angina from NSTEMI, is that an unstable angina, there are normal biomarkers. If you have all of these features and the traponin or CK-MB are elevated, then you have NSTEMI. If you have all these features, but the biomarkers are normal, then you call it unstable angina.

But at the blood vessel level, what's happening is the same process, plaque rupture, and thrombus formation. Because these patients have normal biomarkers, the diagnosis is based largely on the patient's history. You have to take a very careful history to make a diagnosis of unstable angina. These patients have chest pain that is increasing in frequency and intensity. For example, patients may have multiple episodes of pain per day, and the episodes may be getting more and more severe. These patients also often have chest pain at rest, and all of these are features that are not seen in stable angina. Sometimes their ECG changes, and this can help with the diagnosis of these patients may have the same ECG changes as NSTEMI like ST depressions and T-wave inversions, but these are not always present.

And the treatment is the same as for NSTEMI. In fact, if you look up clinical trials of different drugs, you will see that these drugs were tested in patients with UA/NSTEMI. And what they mean is that the inclusion criteria for the trial were patients with unstable angina or NSTEMI, they both have the same pathologic process, plaque rupture with subtotal occlusion, and they both are treated the same way.

And that concludes our module on Unstable Angina and NSTEMI.