05 Stable Angina
---

Hello everyone and welcome to our module on stable angina.

Stable angina is a clinical syndrome where patients develop ischemic chest pain with exertion that is relieved by rest, and the pattern of symptoms with exertion and relief with rest is stable over time. That's why it's called stable angina.

It's also called stable angina because at the coronary artery level, what's happening is there is a stable coronary atherosclerotic plaque, as shown in this image here that has progressed to occlude a significant portion of the lumen. But importantly, the plaque has an intact fibrous cap here, there's no plaque rupture and no thrombus formation and that also differentiates stable angina from other coronary syndromes like unstable angina and myocardial infarction.

When plaque develops in the coronary arteries, symptoms generally do not occur until the plaque has grown to obstruct about 75% of the lumen of the vessel. The reason this is the case is because with lesser degrees of occlusion, the distal arterioles can dilate to maintain normal flow. So if you look at this corner here on the screen here, recall that beyond this coronary artery, there's branching down to small arterioles. Those materials are under the control of autoregulation by the coronary system. So when there is decreased blood flow, those arterioles will vasodilate and that will maintain normal blood flow, and that's the reason that patients can have 25% or 50% plaques and not have any symptoms. However, once the occlusion of the major coronary vessel becomes about 75%, like shown in this drawing here, at that point, the arterioles are maximally dilated, they can't dilate anymore, and at that point flow begins to be compromised, especially with exertion when the oxygen demand rises.

When you examine a patient with stable angina in the office, they will appear entirely normal, they have no symptoms, their exam is normal, even their EKG is normal. If you wanna make a diagnosis of this condition, you have to stress the heart and the classic way this is done is with a cardiac stress test. So the patient is placed on a treadmill, EKG leads are placed on the patient and the patient walks and the treadmill gets faster and steeper over time. This will increase the demand for oxygen, and if the patient has coronary disease, it should cause angina and also the ECG will begin to show changes consistent with ischemia, changes like ST-depressions and T-wave inversions.

To understand the treatment for stable angina you need to appreciate that this is not a thrombotic problem. So there is no thrombus present as there is in unstable angina or myocardial infarction. So there's no role for heparin or anti thrombotic drugs like we use in those other conditions. In the United States, this is usually treated with revascularization, which I talked about in the video on ischemia basics, the most common indication for PCI or CABG is stable angina. There's much more stable angina in the United States than there is acute coronary syndromes like unstable angina and myocardial infarction.

Now, I won't go into this in detail, but I will mention that recent clinical trials have suggested that medical therapy may work just as well as revascularization like PCI or CABG for some patients, and there is a concern in the United States that we may be overusing stents because medical therapy can also work.

So a typical case of stable angina is described on the slide here. A 65 year old man notice has chest pain while he's walking, it's relieved with rest. He goes to the emergency department. His EKG is normal, his cardiac biomarkers are normal. He's referred for a stress test, he walks into treadmill and develops chest pain and EKG changes. He's then referred for cardiac catheterization where a 90% blockage of his LAD artery is noted, a stent is placed in the angina goes away.

Now as I mentioned before, in the United States, stable angina is almost always treated with stent implantation and coronary revascularization. However, it can be treated with medications and on your board exam, they're going to want you to know about this because the medications impact basic parameters of cardiac physiology to exert their beneficial effects. So when you're thinking about using drugs to treat ischemia, you need to choose drugs for the patient that either increase the O2 supply or decrease the O2 demand because the problem in stable angina is a mismatch between oxygen supply and demand.

Ways that drugs can raise the O2 supply is by dilating coronary arteries or increasing the time of diastole. Remember, the corner arteries are mostly perfused in diastole, so the longer the period of the diastole, the more profusion of myocardium, ways that you can decrease demand with drugs in terms of ischemia, or to lower the heart rate, lower contractility or decrease the afterload or preload. Remember, these are the four major determinants of myocardial oxygen demand.

We'll start by talking about nitrates. This is the classic class of drugs that is used to treat stable angina. Nitrates have many forms but the classic form is nitroglycerin, its chemical structure is shown on the slide here, and you can see that it has lots of nitric oxide elements within the molecule. So if you know that it's easy to remember that nitrate type drugs are all converted to nitric oxide, which then exerts vasodilation on the blood vessels in the body.

The predominant mechanism of benefit of nitrates in stable angina is venous dilation. So these drugs will dilate the veins and bigger veins hold more blood. This pulls blood and takes blood away from the left ventricle and that lowers the preload and you may know that a marker of preload is the left ventricle and diastolic volume and this will fall after patients take a nitrate type medication. These drugs also exert some arterial vasodilation, although the degree of dilation of arteries is much less than veins. This is also helpful in stable angina because by dilating arteries, you dilate the coronary arteries and that will raise coronary perfusion.

There's also some peripheral vasodilation, which will decrease the afterload on the left ventricle. Because nitrates decreased the preload to the left ventricle, they will slightly decrease the cardiac output. This will lead to activation of the sympathetic nervous system. Anytime the cardiac output falls and the effective circulating volume falls, the sympathetic nervous system activates. This in turn will increase the heart rate and contractility and that's not helpful and stable angina increases oxygen demand, and it's the opposite of what we want to do for angina. In rare patients who have very severe complex coronary disease, angina can paradoxically occur after they take a nitrate.

Now it turns out in most patients the preload reducing effects of nitrates dominate and nitrates alone improve angina for the majority of patients, but there are some patients with severe CAD who will develop the angina after they take nitrates. And if you wanna block this effect, you can co-administer a beta-blocker or a calcium channel blocker. These block that increase heart rate and increase contractility effects of the sympathetic nervous system, so they blunt the reflex effect of sympathetic activation, and you can co-administer these drugs with nitrates so that patients don't get angina when they take a nitrate.

Nitrate come in many forms, you will likely won't be tested on this on step one, but you should be familiar with this for your clinical rotations. So most patients take either a short-acting tablet under the tongue or a spray under the tongue. This has a rapid action of about five minutes and patients can take this when they have an angina attack or they can take it before they're going to exercise. There's also a forum called isosorbide dinitrate that lasts about six hours, it can be taken several times a day orally. The form that most modern cardiologists use is isosorbide mononitrate. It's a once daily long-acting drug that will allow patients to exercise more and have less angina. And then finally, there are forms of topical nitroglycerin like creams and patches that are sometimes given to patients when they're in the hospital.

Most of the common side effects of nitrates are all related to the fact that these drugs are vasodilators. So many patients who take nitroglycerin develop a headache, this is because of meningeal vasodilation. Some patients develop flushing from increased blood flow to the skin. And as I said before, these drugs drop the cardiac output and therefore they can cause hypotension, they also vasodilate the blood vessels in the periphery. And then as I told you before, angina sometimes occurs from reflex sympathetic activation.

Decades ago, the only forms of nitroglycerin that were available were the short-acting forms that you take under the tongue. And what used to happen is patients would take them over and over again and the drug would stop working because of frequent use. This is because the body becomes tolerant to the effects. So the way this was avoided a long time ago was to not use it continuously or sometimes tell patients to take a 24-hour holiday where they don't use the drug at all.

In the modern era, we don't see this very much because we usually administer the long acting form of nitroglycerin isosorbide mononitrate and tolerance does not occur with this form of the drug. Nitrate withdrawal or nitrate rebound is another phenomena that sometimes happens when patients discontinue their nitrate medication. If patients are taking large dosages, especially the long acting nitrates and they suddenly stop it they can see an increase in the angina frequency and this is called nitrate withdrawal or nitrate rebound.

Monday disease is a disorder that occurs in industrial workers who work in a nitroglycerin manufacturing facility. They are regularly exposed to nitroglycerin in the workplace, and they develop tolerance over time, but then they go home for the weekend and they lose their tolerance. So when they come in Monday morning, and they're re-exposed, they develop all the common side effects of nitroglycerin. So on Monday morning, they would have prominent vasodilation and they would develop tachycardia because the cardiac output would fall, they could get dizzy and they could also develop a headache and this is called Monday disease seen in industrial workers in manufacturing facilities.

Besides nitrates the other major class of drugs used to treat stable angina are the beta blockers. These drugs slow heart rate and decrease contractility and that is all going to lower the myocardial oxygen demand. Now one thing you have to be aware of is beta blockers also increase the preload, the left ventricle end-diastolic volume.

The reason this happens is because when you slow the heart rate, there's more time for filling of the left ventricle and therefore the preload goes up slightly and this will increase oxygen demand which is the opposite of what we wanna do for stable angina and this will blunt some of the beneficial effects of beta blockers. However, overall these drugs are very effective for treating stable angina, and the effects in terms of heart rate and contractility are what dominate. Beta blockers also slightly reduce blood pressure, you may know that they can be used as drugs for hypertension, so by lowering the blood pressure, they reduce the afterload on the left ventricle and this is also a beneficial effect.

So overall, the net effect of all these things shown in the slide is that they lower oxygen demand and improve angina. For angina, we generally use the cardioselective beta-1 blocking drugs like metoprolol and atenolol. And you should know that there are some older beta blockers that are rarely used in the modern era that are partial agonists of beta receptors so they block beta effects of the sympathetic nervous system but they also partially activate the receptors, drugs in this class are pindolol and acebutolol. We don't use these for angina because they can worsen angina by their beta agonist effects.

Finally, calcium channel blockers can be used to treat stable angina. There are three major classes of calcium blockers, the dihydropyridines are drugs like nifedipine, the phenylalkylamines are drugs like verapamil and benzothiazepines are drugs like diltiazem. And all these drugs have various properties that are either vasodilators, or negative inotropes. The nifedipine class of calcium channel blockers works primarily through vasodilation. So drugs like nifedipine, lower the blood pressure, and this reduces the afterload, it also dilates the coronary arteries, and that's the mechanism of action of these drugs for angina.

Now in reality, these drugs are rarely used to treat angina in the modern era, and that's because they cause reflex tachycardia from the drop in blood pressure, similar to nitrates and it blends much of their beneficial effect.

The verapamil/diltiazem type of calcium channel blockers function predominantly as negative inotopes, their effects are very similar to beta blockers, they lower the heart rate and contractility and that reduces oxygen demand. Now one problem with these drugs that you need to be aware of this often comes up on exams is that because they reduce contractility, they can cause acute heart failure in patients if the left ventricular ejection fraction is already very low. Patients with advanced systolic heart failure need all the contractility they can get, so if you administer these drugs, you can potentially cause acute heart failure.

Shown on this slide is a summary of the effects of nitrates and beta blockers on the supply of oxygen which is a good thing in stable angina and the demand of oxygen which is a bad thing in stable angina. Let's start with nitrates. The predominant mechanism of action of nitrates is to decrease the preload. These drugs also increased coronary vasodilation and they decrease the afterload, and all these are good effects shown in green on the slide. All the negative effects of nitrates are from reflex activation of the sympathetic nervous system. So this will increase heart rate and contractility. This will also lower the duration of diastole by raising the heart rate.

Beta blockers major mechanism of benefit is to decrease heart rate and contractility, which is good, they will also lower the afterload, and they will also increase the duration of diastole. The negative effects of beta blockers come from the fact that by slowing the heart rate, they increase the filling time of the left ventricle and therefore they slightly raised a preload. And then if you give the two classes of drugs together, you get all the good effects and none of the bad. So if you give the two classes of drugs together, you decrease preload, you decrease afterload, you increase coronary vasodilation. The effects on heart rate and contractility are blunted or heart and contractility go down from the beta blockers and this is all beneficial for patients with stable angina.

Shown on this slide is a summary of the antianginal effects of calcium channel blockers. So remember that verapamil and diltiazem are similar to beta blockers. Their major mechanism of benefit is decreasing heart rate and contractility. They also lower the afterload and they also decrease the duration of diastole. These are all beneficial effects in angina. Their negative effects are that they slightly increase the preload. Nifedipine is predominantly a vasodilator, so it leads to coronary vasodilation which is helpful, it will also lower the afterload. The problem with nifedipine is that it often leads to reflex sympathetic nervous system activation, this will increase the heart rate and contractility and because the heart rate goes up, the duration of diastole will go down.



And then finally, there's one very new medication that can be used in refractory chronic stable angina, it's called ranolazine. It is a very peculiar mechanism of action that is not intuitive. Ranolazine inhibits something called the late sodium current. So in the video on action potentials, I talked about how the cardiac myocyte action potential looks like this, and how phase zero is caused by an inward sodium current. Well, it turns out there's another smaller sodium current that also occurs in myocytes called the late sodium current. It's different from this one that's responsible for phase zero. So ranolazine inhibits this sodium current and that helps, because in chronically ischemic myocardium, there is something called calcium overload present.

Basically, the cells have excess calcium inside them, and this leads to high wall tension. So by blocking this late sodium influx less sodium comes into cells as I've shown at the bottom of the screen here. In turn, then less sodium is exchanged for calcium, so the net result is that you decrease the calcium inside of cells by blocking this late sodium influx and the net result of this will be less wall tension in the myocardium and therefore less oxygen demand, this is the way that ranolazine works. The major side effects of this drug are constipation, dizziness and headache. The feared side effect of this drug is that it can prolong the QT interval, which can potentially lead to torsade de pointes.

The reason that this happens is because ranolazine also has some potassium channel blocking effects just like Class III antiarrhythmics. So just like Class III antiarrhythmics, it can change the cardiac action potential like from the blue to the red here, and that will prolong the QT interval on the surface ECG and then when the QT interval becomes prolonged that can potentially lead to the arrhythmia torsades de pointes.

Now let's talk about variant angina, which is also called prinzmetal angina. This is a special type of angina where ischemia results from vasospasm. This is not caused by atherosclerotic plaque narrowing, often the artery is clean with no stenosis, although this may also occur near sites of mild atherosclerosis. What happens in variant angina is that the artery suddenly spasms and vasoconstriction and this leads to ischemia.

The mechanism by which this occurs is not well understood, but patients who have variant angina has spontaneous episodes of angina and the word spontaneous is key. These aren't provoked by exertion like stable angina. This leads to transient myocardial ischemia and symptoms like chest pain, it can even lead to transient ST-segment elevations on the ECG. Episodes of variant angina usually occur at rest. So this is very different from stable angina where the episodes often occur with exertion.

The classic time for these episodes to occur is from midnight to early morning. The reason for this is not well understood. Sometimes the symptoms even improve with exertion. So this is very different from stable angina. And this is associated with smoking and most patients who have this disorder are smokers.

The diagnosis of variant angina is usually based on the patient's history, we often consider this diagnosis in patients who have chest pain symptoms, especially in the morning. We also usually consider after someone's had an angiogram that shows no significant coronary disease, then we wonder if they may have vasospasm. There are some ways you can provoke vasospasm to try to make the diagnosis.

One way is to inject a drug called ergonovine directly into the coronary arteries in the cath lab. Ergonovine acts on smooth muscle serotonin receptors, 5-HT2 receptors, and it can be administered during angiography and it will cause vasospasm that you can directly visualize on the angiogram.

Another way you can make this diagnosis is by injecting intracoronary acetylcholine. Acetylcholine as you probably know works on muscarinic receptors in the endothelium. Now in healthy endothelial cells, acetylcholine leads to vasodilation by triggering nitric oxide release. However, many patients with variant angina have endothelial dysfunction and their cells will vasoconstriction when exposed to acetylcholine, and you can also visualize this directly on an angiogram.

The treatment for variant angina is to quit smoking. Sometimes this angina itself improve symptoms. Drugs like calcium channel blockers and nitrates can be used. These are vasodilators that dilate the coronary arteries and oppose the vasospasm. And then finally, the non selective beta blocker propranolol should be avoided in variant angina, people tried this years ago and found that it made symptoms worse. This is believed to be because of unopposed alpha stimulation.

I'll finish this video by talking about coronary steal, which is a unique mechanism of angina that is induced by certain drugs. It gets the name coronary steal because certain drugs cause blood flow to increase to healthy vessels, and to decrease to stenotic vessels and thus, blood is stolen away from disease coronary vessels and that leads to angina.

To understand coronary steal, you have to appreciate that stenotic coronary vessels with a significant 75% or more narrowing, the distal arterioles are maximally dilated to maintain flow. I mentioned this earlier in the video, but if you have a coronary artery, and it has a 75% occlusion by plaque, the distal arterioles will be maximally vasodilated through autoregulation in order to try and maintain normal flow to the myocardium.

The normal vessels whoever in the same patient's heart have no or minimal narrowing of the coronary arteries. So those vessels have arterioles that are not maximally dilated. When you administer a vasodilator in this situation what will happen is that the stenotic vessels will have no response because the arterioles of those vessels are already maximally dilated. The normal vessels however, will vasodilate and thus flow will increase to the normal vessels and flow will decrease to the abnormal vessels, flow will be stolen away from the sick arteries and driven towards the healthy arteries.

The result is ischemia in the territory supplied by a narrowed coronary artery. This is very different from the way you get ischemia when you exercise and that situation what's happening is you are increasing the myocardial oxygen demand and causing ischemia because of a stenosis. In coronary steal, you're causing ischemia because of a stenosis due to decreasing oxygen supply, a very different mechanisms.

In theory, the phenomena of coronary steal could occur with vasodilators like nitrates or nifedipine that we routinely use in heart patients, but it turns out that this is rarely seen. At the usual dosages that we use these medications they generally do not cause coronary steal. The one time coronary steel has clinical relevance is when it comes to chemical stress testing.

Some patients have arthritis or other conditions that prohibit them from walking on a treadmill for a stress test. In this situation, we use vasodilators to induce coronary steal to test for ischemia.

The vasodilators that are used for this purpose are adenosine, presenting and regadenoson all three of these drugs are potent, short-acting vasodilators that are administered intravenously, and they cause a brief decrease in blood flow to stenotic vessels and that leads to is ischemia.

Now usually the amount of a ischemia is mild and the patient's don't develop significant chest pain or ECG changes. And for this reason, we have to use sensitive nuclear tracers to detect the fall in blood flow.

If you look at this image in the bottom left side of the screen, this is a patient's left ventricle during a chemical stress test, a nuclear tracer has been injected, which is delivered to the myocardium proportional to blood flow.

And you can see that the entire left ventricle lights up equally and therefore is orange. On the right side of the screen is the same patient after we've administered a vasodilator.

And you can see that significant portions of the left ventricle are not bright and are in fact dark. This is because those portions have decreased blood flow, and the reason they have decreased blood flow is because we have induced coronary steal, this patient has a significant stenosis in a coronary vessels supplying part of the myocardium.

And because of that stenosis, we've been able to cause coronary steal and divert more blood flow to the other vessels, and this is the principle behind chemical stress testing to screen for ischemia.

And that concludes our video on stable angina.