02 Cardiac Ischemia
---

Hello everyone and welcome to our module on Cardiac Ischemia.

Cardiac ischemia is usually caused by coronary atherosclerosis. And when there is a narrowing of a coronary artery, this decreases the supply of oxygen to the myocardium. And any time the supply of oxygen is less than the demand, this leads to ischemia. So the hallmark of ischemia is an imbalance between oxygen supply and demand. And the typical symptoms that occur when patients develop cardiac ischemia are chest pain, which is called angina, dyspnea, diaphoresis, and there are many many other symptoms, but these are the common and classic symptoms of cardiac ischemia.

There are a number of clinical syndromes that can result from coronary ischemia. And the first one we'll talk about is called stable angina. And stable angina, there is a stable atherosclerotic plaque that is obstructing blood flow in a coronary artery, important however, there's no plaque ulceration and no thrombus and this is in contrast to other ischemic syndromes we'll talk about in a minute.

Now in order for symptoms to occur from a coronary plaque, that plaque must include at least 75% of the lumen. So if you look at the bottom of the screen, a normal vessel is shown here, and this leads to no symptoms. At the bottom we have a plaque that has grown to obstruct 75% or more of the lumen. When this happens, patients are generally comfortable and pain-free at rest, however when they exert themselves and the increased the myocardial oxygen demand that leads to exertional angina. And this is called stable angina for two reasons. First of all, the atherosclerotic plaque is stable and also the symptoms are stable. Patients with stable angina only gets symptoms with exertion and the symptoms go away with rest. And this is very different from patients with other coronary syndromes.

Coronary ischemia can also present not as stable angina, but as what's known as an acute coronary syndrome. All of these syndromes are defined by rupture of an atherosclerotic plaque and formation of a thrombus. Now the thrombus that forms can cause a subtotal occlusion as drawn at the bottom left side of the screen. When this happens, patients may develop either unstable angina, which is anginal type chest pain that occurs in an unstable pattern, or they may develop a myocardial infarction. And the type of myocardial infarction that occurs with a subtotal occlusion is called a Non-ST elevation myocardial infarction.

The acute coronary syndrome can also lead to total occlusion of the vessel with no blood flow beyond the occlusion, because the lumen is entirely occluded by the thrombus. In this case, there's a 100% occlusion of the vessel and no blood flow and this leads to an ST elevation myocardial infarction or STEMI. But all of these clinical syndromes, unstable angina NSTEMI and STEMI are called acute coronary syndrome because they all involve plaque rupture and thrombus formation.

Sudden death unfortunately, is a common complication of coronary disease. Many patients develop a plaque rupture and that leads to ischemia, but before they come to medical attention, they develop an arrhythmia. And you want to remember that arrhythmias are usually the cause of sudden death related to ischemia. The ischemic myocardium is vulnerable to go into irregular rhythms, especially ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation and this can lead to sudden death. And in fact, coronary artery disease is the most common cause of sudden death in adults. In younger patients, the most common cause is hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, but most patients who have sudden death are older and among those patients, CAD is the most common cause.

The most important risk factor for developing angina or an acute coronary syndrome or a myocardial infarction is prior coronary disease. Patients who have had one episode of coronary disease are at very high risk of having another. There are also a number of conditions that are called coronary risk equivalents. And what this means is the risk of coronary disease among these groups is just as high as among patients who've had prior coronary disease. So coronary risk equivalents to coronary disease are diabetes, peripheral arterial disease and chronic kidney disease. Patients with any of these conditions have just as high risk of having coronary disease as a patient who has already had a coronary event.

Other risk factors are shown on this slide. Hypertension is a risk factor. Hyperlipidemia is a risk factor. Family history of coronary disease is risk factor, and this is defined as a primary relative meaning mother, father, brother or sister, who was a male and had coronary disease before the age of 50, or who was a female and had coronary disease before the age of 60. Smoking is also a risk factor so is obesity and sedentary lifestyle. And these last two here, are considered the modifiable risk factors. There's nothing you can do about your family history, but you can modify your risk of coronary disease by not smoking, getting exercise and avoiding obesity.

When you look at the extent of ischemia, meaning the extent of myocardial tissue affected by ischemia. There are two general pathologic patterns that are seen. The first pattern is called transmural ischemia. This is what a seen when there is complete 100% flow obstruction in a coronary artery as occurs in a STEMI. If you look at the bottom right side of the screen here, this is a drawing of what transmural ischemia looks like. So if a patient dies of a STEMI and you examine their heart in the pathology lab, you will see that an entire wall of the myocardium is ischemic and as necrosis. This is called transmural ischemia. And this occurs when a coronary vessel is completely occluded and completely deprives an entire wall of the myocardium of oxygen.

The other pathologic pattern that's seen is called subendocardial ischemia. This occurs when there's flow obstruction, but some distal blood flow. You can see this among patients with stable angina, unstable angina or NSTEMI. So for example, if a patient dies of an NSTEMI, remember in NSTEMI there's some distal blood flow. If you examine that patient's heart in the path lab, you will see what's on the bottom left side of the screen, this is subendocardial ischemia.

Note that the area of infarction in NSTEMI is not the entire wall, it's not transmural. It's limited to the subendocardium. The reason this happens is because the coronary arteries are located out here in the epicardium. The endocardial layer can get oxygen from the left ventricular cavity here, but the sub endocardial layer has to get its oxygen from the coronary artery. And that layer is the furthest away from the coronary artery. So it's the most vulnerable to ischemia. So when you have limitations in flow that are not complete or 100%, this is the area that becomes ischemic. So this area becomes ischemic in patients with stable angina and unstable angina. And in patients within NSTEMI, this is the area that develops infarction.

Subendocardial ischemia occurs when there's a subtotal occlusion, there still some distal blood flow, but it's limited. This leads to subendocardial ischemia as shown in the drawing on the right. Transmural ischemia occurs when there's complete occlusion of a vessel. This is seen in STEMI. This leads to transmural ischemia as shown in the picture on the right.

Now let's talk about the EKG changes that can be seen in ischemia. And we'll start by talking about ST depressions. This is a classic finding in subendocardial ischemia. Let's start by looking at this drawing on the left side of the screen. This is a drawing of a heart. This is the left ventricular cavity here. This is the right ventricular cavity here. And this blue portion here is an area of subendocardial ischemia.

And when myocardial tissue becomes ischemia, it depolarizes. So this area of the heart is depolarized. Out here we have an ECG lead looking at that portion of the heart near the subendocardial ischemia. And the first thing that you have to understand to understand ST depressions is that anytime a wave of depolarization goes towards an ECG lead, this creates an upward deflection on the surface ECG and a wave of depolarization going away from an ECG lead creates a negative depolarization on the surface ECG.

The next thing you need to understand is that this area of subendocardial ischemia is depolarized even at rest. And that creates little waves of depolarization going away from it. Even at rest there are waves of depolarization moving away from this portion of subendocardial ischemia. What that's gonna do in terms of this ECG lead here is it's going to elevate the baseline of the ECG. The dotted line here is where the normal baseline should be.

But the baseline for the heart with subendocardial ischemia is up in the air or elevated. And the reason for that, is because the subendocardial section of myocardium is depolarized at rest and it's creating little waves of depolarization moving away from him.

When the heart depolarizes, the whole thing becomes blue, not just the little portion of subendocardial ischemia, but everything becomes blue. This brings the baseline down to the dotted line where it should have started from, then the heart repolarizes and goes back to the state it started in with the baseline backup in the air.

What you see when you look at the EKG is what's shown here. You see ST depressions, but in reality, these are caused by baseline ST elevations. But nevertheless the appearance they give in the surface ECG is ST segment depressions. And that's because of an area of subendocardial ischemia.

Another EKG change you can see in subendocardial ischemia is a T wave inversion. This is shown on the ECG and the drawing on the right side of the screen. Note that the T waves are upside down. There is also evidence of ST segment depression here, this is the baseline, and this is the depressed ST segment.

There are many causes of T wave inversions, other than coronary disease, although subendocardial ischemia can cause T wave inversions. You can see this when the intracerebral pressure is very high. This is called a cerebral T wave. You can see T wave invasions in resolving pericarditis.

These are a normal finding in many patients with bundle branch blocks, and you can also see them when the left ventricle or right ventricle has hypertrophied. To understand the mechanism of T wave inversions, let's go back to our drawing of the heart with the left ventricle here and the right ventricle here. And this blue portion here, is a section of subendocardial ischemia.

Normally the epicardium out here repolarizes first and the subendocardium over here, repolarizes last. This creates a wave of repolarization going in this direction. Now I told you before that waves of dipolarization create an upward deflection when they are going toward an ECG lead like this one. Waves of repolarization are the opposite. They create an upward deflection where they are going away from the ECG lead.

So because we have repolarization not depolarization, repolarization going away from this ECG lead. The normal T wave is upright like this. When you have subendocardial ischemia that changes things, in this setting, this portion of the heart near the ischemic myocardium will repolarize first and this portion out here will repolarize last. That will create a wave of repolarization going towards the ECG lead. And that will create an inverted T wave on the surface ECG.

Now let's talk about ST elevations, which are another ischemic EKG change. ST elevations are only seen in transmural ischemia. It's very important you understand this. Only with complete vessel occlusion and transmural ischemia, will you see an ST elevation.

And that's why the infarctions caused by complete vessel occlusion and transmural ischemia are called ST elevation myocardial infarctions or STEMI. The cause of ST Elevations is similar to the cause of ST depressions. In this case, we have transmural ischemia.

So an entire wall is depolarized at rest because of ischemia. That creates little waves of depolarization moving away from it at rest. The ECG lead will see this as waves moving away from it, and therefore the baseline of the ECG tracing will be reduced.

Normally it should be the dotted line, but now it's lowered to this blue line here. When the entire myocardium depolarizes. We now return to the normal baseline, which is the dotted line. And then when we go back to the resting state, we go back to the blue line, which is below the normal dotted-line.

What we see on the surface ECG is an ST segment elevation as shown in the drawing here. This is the baseline and the ST segment is up in the air or elevated. In reality the cause is that this baseline here is lower than it should be but nevertheless how it appears on the ECG is as an ST Elevation.

And here's a drawing of some ST Elevations and lead V3 and the surface ECG, just so you know what they look like. This is the baseline here, the ST Segment is up in the air here, so this is said to be elevated.

When there is complete occlusion of a coronary artery and transmural infarction that leads to ST Elevations on the surface EKG and that's called an St. Elevation myocardial infarction, or STEMI. There is a pattern of EKG changes that the ECG goes through when a vessel occludes that I've shown on the screen here.

So it begins as normal looking ECG on the left, acutely the ST Segment rises as shown here. That's what we talked about in the last slide. After a few hours, a Q wave will develop any time you see a Q wave that means there is an active or prior myocardial infarction in that portion of the heart. After about two days the T wave inverts between three and seven days, the ST Segments come back to baseline, but the T wave inversion persists. And then beyond about a week, the only thing that is left behind is the Q wave.

So you can see Q waves in patients who had a myocardial infarction even years ago, it's evidence of an old myocardial infarction, but remember, you can also see them acutely, so the presence of a Q wave doesn't necessarily mean that the infarction is old there can be an acute function occurring.

Hyperacute T waves are another finding sometimes seen in transmural ischemia. They're often seen very early sometimes before ST elevations. Hyperacute T waves are peaked T waves similar to what you can see in hyperkalemia. This is an example of them shown in the screen here.

They often occur together with ST segment depressions. And if you look at these ST segments, this is the baseline. This is the ST segment, there's some ST depression here. In addition to the pointed or peaked T waves, these are called hyperacute T waves.

Poor R Wave Progression is another finding that can be seen in coronary ischemia. So normally the R wave increases in size or amplitude, or it progresses in size or amplitude as you go from V1 to V6. So lead V1 typically has a very small R wave and a very deep S wave. By the time you get to V6, you usually have a tall R wave and very little S wave, that's the normal progression.

Normally you should see an R wave that's larger than the S wave by lead V3. If you have poor progression, this is a sign of anterior ischemia. You can see this acutely with an anterior infarction, and you can see it in patients who had a prior infarction many years ago.

And just by way of review on the screen here is a normal ECG this is the R wave, and this is the S wave. Here's a normal ECG and lead V1, notice that there's a very tiny R wave and then a deep S wave. When we get to V6, there's basically no S wave, it's all R wave. And as we go from V1 to V2 to V3 and onto V6, the R wave gets progressively bigger. By the time we get to V3, we have a taller R wave than we do an S wave. And by the time we get to V4, the R wave clearly dominates. This is a normal progression of the R wave.

And here's an example of poor R wave progression. So notice that by the time we get to V3, we still have very tiny R waves and a very big S wave that persists into V4. By the time we get the V5, they're roughly equal, and only when we get to V6, do we see an R wave that's a little bit bigger than the S wave. This is called poor R wave progression.

You can see this in patients who are having an acute anterior infarction. You can also see this in patients who have had a prior anterior wall infarction many years ago.

I'm gonna briefly discuss the treatment of coronary artery disease. In order to understand the treatment, you need to understand the terms shown on this slide. Revascularization means to restore blood flow to the myocardium when there is a blockage.

Angioplasty means to reshape a blood vessel. This can be done in a number of ways, but the most common way is through coronary stent implantation. Stents are small metal devices that can be in a coronary artery, and they basically smush plaque against the wall to widen the lumen so that blood can flow normally.

And then finally coronary bypass surgery is a surgical procedure where the chest is opened up and bypass conduits are stitched in to deliver blood flow from the aorta beyond an obstruction in one of the coronary arteries.

On the left side of the screen is a coronary angiogram from a patient before coronary angioplasty. In coronary angiography dye is injected into the coronary arteries and note that this black dye is filling the blood vessels. This is the LAD artery shown in the screen, and the LAD as a severe narrowing that you can see right here.

Note that the black dye forms down to a pinpoint and then goes on to fill the distal vessel. That's a severe atherosclerotic narrowing. It's not complete because there is blood flow to the distal vessel. On the right is the same blood vessel. After a stent has been placed you can now see that the black dye fills the entire vessel, and there's no narrowing.

This is an example of a revascularization procedure with a coronary stent. Shown on this slide is some of the terminology around coronary stents. So when we say we did an angioplasty, we mean we reshaped the vessel. And as I told you earlier, this is most commonly with a coronary stent, but there is another way to do it.

Balloon angioplasty means inflating a balloon to smush plaque against the wall, and then deflating the balloon and removing it with no stent left behind. So rarely in the modern era, but more commonly years ago, simple balloon angioplasty was done. Now we most often place stents. When we perform balloon angioplasty or place a stent that is called a percutaneous coronary intervention or PCI.

It gets the word percutaneous in its name because you go across the skin to enter a blood vessel, usually in the wrist or a groin, and then catheters are inserted in threaded up to the heart. And then finally, we usually just say a stent was placed to refer to implantation of a coronary stent. And this is a very common procedure, about 600,000 stents per year are planted in the United States. Here's a drawing from the web just to make this even more clear.

So we have an occlusion of a coronary artery here. And if we look at it in cross section, we would see that much of the lumen is occluded by plaque, this yellow stuff here, we then take a wire and we thread it across the plaque. The wire holds a deflated balloon and a non expanded coronary stent. In other words, a collapsed coronary stent. The balloon is then inflated and when it's inflated, it pushes the plaque against the wall and in addition, it expands the metal stent. The balloon is then deflated and removed, but the stent is left behind.

And now if you look at the coronary artery in cross-section, you see a widened artery with struts of the stent, and the plaque is smashed against the wall. That is coronary angioplasty with stent implantation, commonly done in the United States. Some patients have blockages that are either too extensive or too severe to be treated with angioplasty. And in this case, bypass surgery is an option.

The technical name is coronary artery bypass surgery, but it's more commonly called a CABG. The idea here is that if you have a coronary artery with a plaque that's obstructing it, the surgeon will stitch another blood vessel beyond the obstruction that will deliver blood flow past the plaque. That's why it's called a bypass because you're bypassing the obstruction in the coronary artery. There are a couple of ways to do this.

Many times the surgeons take the left internal mammary artery from the subclavian. They leave it attached to the subclavian and they attach the distal end to a coronary artery. This is called a Lima Graft. Surgeons also sometimes harvest the saphenous veins from the leg or the radial artery from the arm. And then they use those as conduits. They stitch one end to the order and the other end to a coronary artery beyond an obstruction.

On this slide, I've blown up the picture from the last slide. So this is a Lima graft. It's connected to the subclavian artery up here, and the surgeon has stitched it into the LAD to supply blood flow to the distal LAD. Over here we've got saphenous vein or radiographs. You can see the surgeon has stitched them to the aorta. And then the other end is stitched to one of the other coronary arteries beyond an obstruction.

The major indications for revascularization are shown in this slide. Angina is the most common revascularization indication in the United States. Second to that is myocardial infarction. Sometimes we revascularize patients with systolic dysfunction. They can have what's known as hibernating myocardium. So when the myocardium is severely deprived of oxygen, it can go into a hibernating state where it is still alive, but it is not contracting normally, in this situation when you restore blood flow, sometimes the systolic function and the left ventricular ejection fraction improves.

Shown on the screen, is the progression of pathologic changes that you see after a myocardial infarction in the myocardium. So when there's a myocardial infarction in the first four hours, there are no changes that you can see grossly when you examine the heart. So if patients die within an hour or so from an arrhythmia after a myocardial infarction, you may actually find a normal heart a pathology. After about four hours grossly, the heart begins to look modeled, than if you examine the tissue under the microscope, you see evidence of necrosis and edema, hemorrhage.

Between 12 and four hours grossly, the heart looks hyperemic, so it can be bright red, and you can see inflammation in the tissue surrounding the infarcted area. Between five and 10 days, the heart begins to look yellow grossly. If you examine pathologic specimens of patients who died between five and 10 days, you see a yellow portion of the heart, where there was no blood flow and microscopically, you see infiltration of that area with granulation tissue. And then by about seven weeks, the infarcted area is replaced with a gray-white scar, and you also see scar tissue under the microscope.

From my point of view as a clinical cardiologist, however those pathologic changes are much less important than the complications of ischemia, there are a number of complications of ischemia, and they all tend to occur within specific timeframes. So there are certain complications in the first few days, other complications in the first week or so, and then finally, a set of complications that occurs many weeks or even months after a myocardial infarction.

I mentioned this earlier, but in the first few days after myocardial infarction, the major cause of death is arrhythmia shown on the screen is ventricular tachycardia. This is a life-threatening arrhythmia. This commonly occurs in patients who have had a myocardial infarction, and this is the way they can die in the first four days. So if you're asked in a board question about what you should worry about shortly after a patient develops ischemia, the answer is a arrhythmias that is the most dangerous complication of ischemia early after an infarction.

About five to 10 days after a myocardial infarction is when the infarcted tissue becomes necrotic and it lacks the normal strength of the myocardium and it's vulnerable to rupture. And this can lead to what are known as the mechanical complications of myocardial infarction. These are rarely seen in the modern era because we usually perform angioplasty quickly, and we don't allow the myocardium to become necrotic.

But years ago, patients would have large infarctions and get large areas of necrosis in their left ventricle. And that could lead to the complications described in this slide.

The first one is free wall rupture. This is rupture of one of the walls of the left ventricle. This is usually a fatal complication of myocardial infarction, it leads to sudden death. In rare cases, it can lead to blood surrounding the heart in the pericardium, and therefore can cause tamponade.

Second mechanical complication is rupture of a papillary muscle. This will lead to acute mitral regurgitation, which if you've watched the video on murmurs, you should know causes a holosystolic murmur. Patients who have acute mitral regurgitation can develop heart failure and respiratory distress. And in the cardiac anatomy video, I talk about how papillary muscle rupture is much more common in inferior wall myocardial infarctions that's because the posteromedial papillary muscle as a single blood supply, usually from the right coronary artery. So when this artery is infarcted, that can lead to ischemia and necrosis of the posteromedial papillary muscle, and that can lead to rupture.

And then the final mechanical complication is rupture of the ventricular septum. This leads to a VSD, potentially this can lead to a loud holosystolic murmur with a thrill. This is the classic sounds that are heard with a VSD and clinically this presents us hypotension, right heart failure with elevated jugular venous pressure and edema. All of these things are occurring because the right ventricle is being overloaded with blood from the left ventricle because of the hole in the ventricular septum.

Weeks after a myocardial infarction, a ventricular aneurysm can form. And an aneurysm myocardial wall has been replaced with scar tissue and that scar tissue can bold outward. This is shown in this drawing in the screen here. This is the anterior wall here. You can see that it's thin and filled with scar tissue. It's not red like the normal myocardium. It's also bulging outward. That is an anterior wall aneurysm.

And the problem here is that this wall of the heart is filled with scar tissue. So it's not going to contract. And when the myocardium contracts that keeps blood moving in this situation with an aneurysm blood can develop stasis in this portion right near the aneurysm that can lead to formation of a thrombus. In many of these patients with ventricular aneurysms develop thrombus, and they're at risk for strokes or peripheral embolism from the thrombus sitting in the aneurysm.

To make this even more confusing at the medical student level, there is another complication of myocardial infarction called ventricular pseudoaneurysm. This is a wall rupture that is contained by a pericardium or scar tissue. And it's different from a true aneurysm like we talked about in the last side, because it's not surrounded by endocardium or myocardium instead, it's surrounded by something holding in the free wall rupture.

So if this is the left ventricle and we develop scar tissue here from an infarction and that scar tissue matures, and then bulges outward, that's a true aneurysm. All the blood is still contained in the left ventricular cavity.

In contrast in a pseudoaneurysm, what you have is a rupture in the wall and blood begins to leak out, but then the pericardium or some scar tissue near the point of rupture, kind of contains it and creates a little bulge outward. It's filled with blood. It's not surrounded by normal myocardial walls and this is called a pseudoaneurysm.

These can be very dangerous because they may rupture. They sometimes present as chest pain or dyspnea, and they're more common in the inferior wall. And the two major contrast between a true aneurysm and a pseudoaneurysm are the location and the timing.

So true aneurysms usually happen in the anterior wall like I showed you on the last slide. Pseudoaneurysms are much more common in the inferior wall. Also true aneurysms take several weeks to occur in contrast to pseudo aneurysm occurs in less than two weeks. Remember it's just another version of a free wall rupture, so it occurs early just like free wall rupture.

So a pseudoaneurysm is gonna be an inferior wall complication in the first week or two. The true aneurysm is going to be an anterior wall complications several weeks after an infarction.

Dressler's syndrome is a form of pericarditis that occurs weeks to months after myocardial infarction. It presents just like other forms of pericarditis with chest pain and a friction rub.

And I talk about all the clinical features of pericarditis in the video and pericardial diseases. Also just like other forms of pericarditis, this is an immune-mediated phenomenon, although the details are not known something about the ischemia triggers an immune reaction against the pericardium in a subset of patients.

And that immune reaction takes several weeks or months to develop. And the treatment is the same as for other forms of pericarditis it's with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or steroids or the medication colchicine.

Don't confuse Dressler syndrome with another type of pericarditis that can follow a myocardial infarction called fibrinous pericarditis. In contrast to Dressler syndrome, fibrinous pericarditis occurs days after a myocardial infarction. It's sometimes referred to as post-Mi pericarditis.

This is not an autoimmune process. It's simply an extension of the myocardial inflammation into the pericardium. So a few days after an infarction, when there's a lot of inflammatory activity in the myocardium that can extend into the pericardium and cause pericarditis symptoms.

In contrast Dressler's occurs weeks after a myocardial infarction, it's sometimes referred to as post cardiac injury pericarditis, and this is an autoimmune phenomenon. And neither of these forms of pericarditis that occur after MI are usually life-threatening, they're simply pain syndromes that can be treated with medication.

Now let's talk about secondary prevention of coronary disease. Any patient who has had coronary disease, as I mentioned earlier in this video has a high risk of recurrent events.

Patients who have had one coronary episode are at risk for STEMI, NSTEMI and development of stable angina later in life For this reason, we usually administer our aggressive preventative therapy to lower the risk of subsequent events. We even do this in asymptomatic patients.

So patients who have been revascularized and have no angina still need therapy to lower their risk of secondary cardiac events. There are a number of proven therapies, but the main ones are shown in this slide. So any patient who's had coronary disease of any form should be on aspirin and a statin.

The statin drugs you may know, reduce cholesterol levels. These are drugs like atorvastatin and rosuvastatin, but even in patients with normal LDL cholesterol, there is evidence that statins lower the risk if patients have a history of coronary disease. Beta blockers are also usually administered to patients who have had an infarction like a STEMI or NSTEMI.

There is evidence that these drugs lower the risk of sudden cardiac death among patients who have had any form of myocardial infarction. I'll finish this video by talking about two complications of stents that you should be familiar with.

The first one is called restenosis. This is the slow steady growth of scar tissue over a stent. So when you implant a metal stent into the wall of the coronary artery, you cause inflammation.

And sometimes that inflammation leads to so much scar tissue formation that it re-occludes the blood vessel. So if you look at this drawing in the right side of the screen, we've got a freshly implanted stent and good blood flow through the vessel, but sometimes scar tissue grows over this stent and reblocks the vessel and the angina returns.

The way that scar tissue forms is through a process called Neo-intimal hyperplasia. Neo means new, so this is a new intimal layer of the vessel that forms as a result of fibrous tissue hyperplasia that's why it's called Neo-intimal hyperplasia.

This is rarely life-threatening, but it does cause angina to occur. So patients with re-stenosis presents several months after stent implantation with a slow steady return of angina symptoms, especially with exertion. To prevent this complication, most modern stents are coated with the drug, these are called drug eluting stents.

So the metal is covered with a polymer and the polymer is impregnated with a drug that slowly elutes into the vessel over time to prevent tissue growth. The drugs that are used for this are usually chemotherapy agents, sirolimus is a classic one although there are others.

And the idea here is to have the slow illusion to this medication to block the growth of fibrous tissue. The second stent complication is called stent thrombosis, and this name rhymes with restenosis, but it's a completely different process.

This is the acute closure of a stent by a thrombus that forms. Sometimes the metal struts of a stent can serve as a Knight as for clot formation and this can lead to formation of a blood clot in the stent. And this is the same pathophysiology as STEMI.

This is a drawing of a vessel with STEMI at the bottom of the screen. We talked about this earlier. You can imagine that if this blood vessel had a stent instead of this atherosclerotic plaque that could also serve as a night as for thrombus formation, and we get the same pathophysiology complete closure of the vessel by thrombus and no distal blood flow.

To prevent stent thrombosis, two anti-platelet drugs are administered for prevention. I'll talk about that in a minute, but what you should know, especially in terms of board questions is that most cases of stent thrombosis are associated with missed medicine dosages.

So the classic history is a patient who recently had a stent placed who now presents with ST elevations and chest pain and says that they forgot to take their anti-platelet drugs. To prevent stent thrombosis, dual anti-platelet therapy or DAPT is often administered for one year.

DAPT includes one year of asprin and another anti-platelet drugs such as Clopidogrel, Prasugrel or Ticagrelor. Now after one year, the stent metal is usually no longer exposed to the blood. A process called endothelialization occurs where tissue grows over the metal struts.

At this point, the risk of thrombosis is lower, although it's not zero. There are case reports of stent thrombosis years after stent implantation. So after a year, usually patients only take aspirin going forward. They no longer need two anti-platelet drugs.

And that concludes our video on cardiac ischemia.